PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS
7.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process provides a numerical estimate of the overall effect of risk on
the objectives of the project, based on current plans and information, when considering risks simultaneously.
Results from this type of analysis can be used to evaluate the likelihood of success in achieving project
objectives and to estimate contingency reserves, usually for time and cost that are appropriate to both the risks
and the risk tolerance of project stakeholders.
I t is generally accepted that analyzing uncertainty in the project using quantitative techniques such as
Monte Carlo simulation may provide more realism in the estimate of the overall project cost or schedule
than a non-probabilistic approach which assumes that the activity durations or line-item cost estimates are
deterministic. However it should be recognized that quantitative risk analysis is not always required or appropriate
for all projects. For example, qualitative risk analysis may provide enough information for development of
effective risk responses, especially for smaller projects. Therefore, during the Plan Risk Management process,
the benefi ts of quantitative risk analysis should be weighed against the effort required to ensure that the
additional insights and value justify the additional effort.
P artial risk analyses, such as qualitative risk analysis, aim at prioritizing individual risks viewed one at a time
and therefore cannot produce measures of overall project risk when all risks are considered simultaneously.
Calculating estimates of overall project risk is the focus of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.
S pecifi c project risks are usually best understood and quantifi ed at a detailed level such as the line-item
cost or schedule activity level. By contrast, project objectives such as achievement of the project’s budget or
the schedule are specifi ed at a higher level, often at the level of the total project. An overall risk analysis, such
as one that uses quantitative techniques, estimates the implication of all quantifi ed risks on project objectives.
The implementation of overall risk analysis using quantitative methods requires:
• Complete and accurate representation of the project objectives built up from individual project
elements. Examples of these representations include the project schedule or cost estimate.
• Identifying risks on individual project elements such as schedule activities or line-item costs at a
level of detail that lends itself to specifi c assessment of individual risks.
• Including generic risks that have a broader effect than individual project elements.
• Applying a quantitative method (such as Monte Carlo simulation or decision tree analysis) that incorporates
multiple risks simultaneously in determining overall impact on the overall project objective.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
R esults of the quantitative analysis will be compared to the project plan (baseline or current) to give
management an estimate of the overall project risk and will answer important questions such as:
• What is the probability of meeting the project’s objectives?
• How much contingency reserve (e.g., reserves or buffers of time, resources, and cost) is needed to
provide the organization with the level of certainty it requires based upon its risk tolerance?
• W hat are those parts of the project, such as line-item costs or schedule activities, which contribute
the most risk when all risks are considered simultaneously?
• Which individual risks contribute the most to overall project risk?
Estimating overall project risk using quantitative methods helps distinguish those projects where quantifi ed
risks threaten objectives beyond the tolerance of the stakeholders, from those for which the objectives are
within acceptable tolerances even when risk is considered. The former may be targeted for vigorous risk
responses aimed at protecting those objectives most important to the stakeholders.
A high-level comparison of quantitative and qualitative risk analysis processes is presented in Figure 7-1.
Figure 7-1. Comparison of Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches
7.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process
Success in achieving the objectives of quantitative risk analysis depends explicitly on at least the factors
described in Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.6.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
7.2.1 Prior Risk Identifi cation and Qualitative Risk Analysis
T he Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process occurs after the Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative
Risk Analysis processes have been completed. Reference to a prioritized list of identified risks ensures
that the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process will consider all significant risks when analyzing their
effects quantitatively.
7.2.2 Appropriate Project Model
A n appropriate model of the project should be used as the basis for quantitative risk analysis. Project
models most frequently used in quantitative risk analysis include the project schedule (for time), line-item
cost estimates (for cost), decision tree (for decisions in the face of uncertainty) and other total-project models.
Quantitative risk analysis is especially sensitive to the completeness and correctness of the model of the
project that is used.
7.2.3 Commitment to Collecting High-Quality Risk Data
O ften high-quality data about risks are not available in any historic database and should be gathered
by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment of those present. Collection of risk data
requires resources and time as well as management support.
7.2.4 Unbiased Data
S uccess in gathering risk analysis data requires the ability to recognize when biases occur and combating
that bias or developing other unbiased sources of the data. Bias in risk data can occur for many reasons, but
two common sources of bias are cognitive bias and motivational bias.
7.2.5 Overall Project Risk Derived from Individual Risks
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is based upon a methodology that correctly derives the
overall project risk from the individual risks. In risk analysis of cost and schedule, for example, an appropriate
method is Monte Carlo simulation. A decision tree is an appropriate method for making decisions when future
events are not certain, using the probability and impact of all risks, and combining their effect to derive an
overall project measure such as value or cost. In each of these methods, the risks are specifi ed at the level
of the detailed tasks or line-item costs and incorporated into the model of the project to calculate effects on
objectives such as schedule or cost for the entire project, by combining those risks.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
7.2.6 Interrelationships Between Risks in Quantitative Risk Analysis
Attention should be given to the possibility that the individual risks in the project model are related to
each other. For example, several risks may have a common root cause and therefore are likely to occur
together. This possibility is sometimes addressed by correlating the risks that are related, ensuring that
they generally occur together during the analysis. Another common way to represent the risks which occur
together is by using the risk register listing of the risk or root cause and attaching it to several project
elements such as schedule activities or cost elements. When a particular risk occurs, the affected elements
will all experience the effect of that risk together.
7.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process
T ools and techniques used appropriately for quantitative risk analysis have several characteristics, as
follows:
7.3.1 Comprehensive Risk Representation
Risk models permit representation of many, if not all, of the risks that have impact on an objective
simultaneously. They also permit the representation of both opportunities and threats to the project’s
objectives.
7.3.2 Risk Impact Calculation
Q uantitative models facilitate the correct calculation of the effect of many risks, which are typically identifi ed
and quantifi ed at a level of detail below the total project, on the project objectives, which are typically described
at the level of the total project.
7.3.3 Quantitative Method Appropriate to Analyzing Uncertainty
Probability models use a quantitative method that addresses uncertainty. Specifi cally, the methods should
be able to handle the way uncertainty is represented, predominantly as probability of an event’s occurring or as
probability distributions for a range of outcomes. A good example of this is the use of Monte Carlo simulation
tools that permit the combination of probability distributions of line-item costs or schedule activity durations,
many of which are uncertain.
7.3.4 Data Gathering Tools
D ata gathering tools used in this process include assessment of historical data and workshops, interviews, or
questionnaires to gather quantifi ed information—for example, on the probability of a risk occurring, a probability
distribution of its potential impacts on cost or time, or relationships such as correlation between risks.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
7.3.5 Effective Presentation of Quantitative Analysis Results
R esults from the quantitative tools are generally not available in standard deterministic project management
methods such as project scheduling or cost estimating. Examples of these are the probability distribution of
project completion dates or total costs and the expected value of a project decision. These results, when all
risks are considered simultaneously, include the following:
• Probability of achieving a project objective such as fi nishing on time or within budget.
• A mount of contingency reserve in cost, time, or resources needed to provide a required level of
confi dence.
• I dentity or location within the project model of the most important risks. An example of this is a
sensitivity analysis in a cost risk analysis or a criticality analysis in a schedule risk analysis.
The elements of a quantitative risk analysis are illustrated in Figure 7-2.
Figure 7-2. Structure of a Quantitative Risk Analysis
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
7.3.6 Iterative Quantitative Risk Analysis
The success of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is enhanced if the process is used periodically
throughout the project. It is impossible to know in advance all of the risks that may occur in a project. Often
quantitative risk analysis should be repeated as the project proceeds. The frequency of this effort will be
determined during the Plan Risk Management process but will also depend on events within the project itself
(see Monitor and Control Risks, Chapter 9).
7.3.7 Information for Response Planning
O verall project contingency reserve in time and cost should be refl ected in the project’s schedule and
budget. Quantitative risk analysis provides information that may be used to modify the project plan. If
the overall risk to time and cost indicates that an adjustment in scope is needed, the scope changes are
agreed upon and documented and a new quantitative risk analysis is carried out to refl ect the new aspects
of the project.
7.4 Documenting the Results of the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process
The contingency reserves calculated in quantitative project cost and schedule risk analysis are incorporated,
respectively, into the cost estimate and the schedule to establish a prudent target and a realistic expectation
for the project. Contingency reserves may also be established to provide for the capture of opportunities that
are judged to be priorities for the project. If the contingency reserve required exceeds the time or resources
available, changes in the project scope and plan may result.
A lso, the results of the analysis may provide more or less urgency to risk response (see Plan Risk Responses,
Chapter 8) depending on the probability of achieving the plan’s objectives or the amount of contingency reserve
required to provide the necessary level of confi dence. The results of a quantitative risk analysis are recorded
and passed on to the person and/or group responsible for project management within the organization for any
further actions required to make full use of these results.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
