PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT
4.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Management Process
T he objectives of the Plan Risk Management process are to develop the overall risk management strategy
for the project, to decide how the risk management processes will be executed, and to integrate Project Risk
Management with all other project management activities.
E ffective risk management requires creation of a risk management plan. This plan describes how the
risk management processes should be carried out and how they fi t in with the other project management
processes. On a broader level, it describes the relationships among Project Risk Management, general project
management, and the management processes in the rest of the organization. To provide the greatest benefi t,
initial risk management planning should be carried out early in the overall planning of the project, and the
corresponding risk management activities integrated into the overall project management plan. The risk
management plan may subsequently need to be adapted as the needs of the project and its stakeholders
become clearer or change.
Although the Project Risk Management processes form an integral part of the overall project management
plan, a budget in terms of resources, cost, and time for the specifi c risk management activities should be
established in order to better track, control, and, as necessary, defend the corresponding expenditures
throughout the project. The cost of treating the risks themselves should be included appropriately in the project
budget, while the risk management plan should describe how this part of the project budget is evaluated,
allocated, and managed. The risk management plan will defi ne the monitoring methods to ensure that the
corresponding expenditures are tracked appropriately, as well as the conditions under which the approved
budget for risk management can be modifi ed.
In the same way that project management is a process of progressive elaboration, risk management
activities need to be repeated throughout the project. The risk management plan should defi ne both the
normal frequency for repeating the processes as well as specifi c or exceptional conditions under which the
corresponding actions should be initiated. The corresponding risk management activities should be integrated
into the project management plan.
There are two categories of success criteria for risk management: those for success of the project in
general, and those for success of Project Risk Management.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
• Project-Related Criteria. To assess the success of Project Risk Management, the stakeholders
must agree on an acceptable level of results for the project-related criteria (such as cost, time, and
scope). In order to ensure consistency and agreement among stakeholders, the risk management
plan should present these objectives with reference to the project defi nition documents. To provide
guidance in risk management, particularly in prioritizing risk responses, stakeholders should also
prioritize each project objective.
• Process-Related Criteria. The measures for success in Project Risk Management depend on a
number of factors, such as the inherent level of uncertainty of the project. For example, the Project
Risk Management process for a research project needs to address more unforeseen changes than
for a project with a more predictable environment. A research Project Risk Management process
may be considered a success even if it results in more variance from the baseline than would be
allowable for a successful process in a more predictable project.
T he level of risk that is considered acceptable in a project depends on the risk attitudes of the relevant
stakeholders. The risk attitudes of both the organization and the stakeholders may be infl uenced by a number
of factors, all of which need to be identifi ed. These include their inherent tolerance for uncertainty, and the
relative importance to them of achieving or missing specifi c project objectives. The output of this analysis
should then be taken into account for setting thresholds and providing weighting factors when applying the
Project Risk Management processes in the specifi c project.
Guidelines and rules for escalating risk-related information to management and other stakeholders should
refl ect the risk attitudes and expectations of the corresponding stakeholders. The project manager should
maintain effective communication with the stakeholders as the project evolves, in order to become aware of
any changes in the stakeholders’ attitudes and adapt the risk management approach to take any new facts
into account.
It is important that the participants share a common understanding of all terms used to describe the risks,
and that the critical values and thresholds that will serve as parameters for the tools should be defi ned in a
manner consistent with the scope of the project and the attitudes of the stakeholders. If qualitative analysis
uses such terms as “high impact” or “medium probability,” these should be defi ned objectively in the risk
management plan. Similarly, the risk management plan should specify any key numerical values required in
quantitative analysis or for decision-making in risk response planning or risk monitoring and control.
R isk management planning should establish the type and level of risk detail to be addressed and provide a
template of the risk register that will be used for recording risk-related information. The risk management plan
should also indicate the intensity of effort and the frequency with which the various Project Risk Management
processes should be applied; this depends on the characteristics of the project as well as on the specifi ed risk
management objectives.
I n order for the Project Risk Management processes to be carried out correctly and effectively, the project
team and other stakeholders need to know where and when they will be expected to participate, their criteria
for determining success, their level of authority, and what action to take relative to actions or decisions beyond
this level. The risk management plan specifi es the project’s risk management roles and responsibilities and
defi nes the corresponding expectations for both senior management and project personnel.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
R isk-related communication occurs at two levels: (a) within the project team, and (b) between the project
team and the other project stakeholders. The principles for each of these categories of communication are
defi ned in the risk management plan. For the team, the plan describes the frequency and scope of the various
risk management meetings and reports required to carry out the corresponding Project Risk Management
processes as well as the structure and content of such meetings and reports. For the other stakeholders, the
plan sets their expectations as to the structure, content, and frequency of routine documents to be received
as well as the way in which information will be shared for escalation or exceptional events. Details of the
information required by the project team from stakeholders should also be clearly defi ned.
4.2 Critical Success Factors for the Plan Risk Management Process
T he principal criteria for a valid risk management plan are acceptance by the stakeholders, alignment
with the internal and external constraints on the project, balance between cost or effort and benefi t, and
completeness with respect to the needs of the Project Risk Management process. Critical success factors for
the Plan Risk Management process are detailed below.
4.2.1 Identify and Address Barriers to Successful Project Risk Management
The time and effort required to carry out the Plan Risk Management process will not be supported unless
the stakeholders, and especially management in the organization responsible for the project, recognize and
accept the benefi ts of managing risk, and the added value of addressing this as a skill in its own right rather
than as a passive or reactive component of general project management.
A clear defi nition of the project objectives and a high-level view of the project environment and solution
approach are required to provide a valid basis for risk management. The project manager should therefore
ensure that valid defi nition and planning information is available for the plan risk management activity.
A n organization inexperienced in risk management planning may need to develop its own approach and
may expend an inappropriate amount of time and effort on this. Alternatively it may use a proprietary or
pre-existing approach which requires tailoring. The availability of some or all of the following organizational
process assets contributes to the chances of success of the Plan Risk Management activities: standard
templates, predefi ned risk categories, and an established project management methodology incorporating
risk management procedures that specify what risk information is required for decision making, when it is
required, and a defi nition of concepts and terms, roles, responsibilities, and authority levels. Access to relevant
lessons learned at this stage will allow this experience to be taken into account from the start of the project.
The risk management plan will not deliver its value unless Project Risk Management is carried out as
an integral part of the project. The corresponding activities should be built into the project work breakdown
structure and included in the corresponding schedule, budget, and work-assignment documents.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
4.2.2 Involve Project Stakeholders in Project Risk Management
The project manager needs to involve the project stakeholders in the Plan Risk Management activities to
build on their skills and experience as well as to ensure their understanding of, and commitment to, the full
Project Risk Management process.
The provision for risk management resources specifi ed within the risk management plan should be
approved by management at a level adequate for carrying out the required Project Risk Management processes
in accordance with agreed-upon objectives. Management should be involved in the analysis of the level of
resourcing required for managing project risk and accept the risks that may arise from specifi c limitations
placed on the provision of resources. Disagreements between stakeholders in the areas of risk tolerance and
evaluation measures should be addressed and resolved.
4.2.3 Comply with the Organization’s Objectives, Policies, and Practices
The feasibility of risk management planning is dependent upon the features of the organization in which
it is carried out. The rules and guidelines defi ned in the risk management plan should be compatible with the
culture of the organization, its capabilities from the point of view of people and facilities, and its values, goals,
and objectives.
P roject management in general, and risk management in particular, contribute to the organization’s effective
governance. The risk management plan should identify and take into account the relevant organizational
procedures and any other enterprise environmental factors that apply such as strategic risk management or
corporate governance processes.
4.3 Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Management Process
4.3.1 Planning Sessions
P lanning sessions are recommended in order to build a common understanding of the project’s risk approach
between project stakeholders and to gain agreement on the techniques to be used for managing risk.
E laboration of the risk management plan often serves to develop an effective means for the team to work
together since a similar consultative team approach will be used in subsequent stages of the risk management
process. The participants should include: the project manager, selected project team members and other
stakeholders, members of the broader organization having responsibility for risk, and other subject matter
experts or facilitators, as needed.
At this point, the initial risk responsibilities, methodology, templates, terms, defi nitions, time schedules, and
cost budgets for the other Project Risk Management processes should be assigned and accepted. The specifi cation
for the tools that will be used in subsequent processes should include all parameters and other inputs required
to ensure their applicability to the specifi c project. These should be documented in the risk management plan,
which, when formally approved, is the principal deliverable of the Plan Risk Management process.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
4.3.2 Templates
In order to benefi t from experience and existing best practice, risk management planning should take into
account relevant existing templates for work products, such as risk status reports, risk breakdown structures
or the risk register. A decision should be made as to which templates are relevant to the project, and these
should then be adapted and included in the risk management plan.
4.4 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Management Process
T he results of risk management planning are documented in the risk management plan. The plan serves
to provide all project stakeholders with a common view of how the risk-related activities of the project will be
handled, what has been agreed upon, and a description of the stakeholders’ involvement and responsibilities
in these activities. An overview of the key areas of focus is given in Figure 4-1.
Figure 4-1. Key Areas of Focus for the Plan Risk Management Process
Depending upon the size and complexity of the project, some or all of the following elements will be present
in a risk management plan.
• Introduction;
• Project description;
• Risk management methodology;
• Risk management organization;
• Roles, responsibilities, and authority;
• Stakeholder risk tolerance;
• Criteria for success;
• Risk management tools and guidelines for use;
• Thresholds and corresponding defi nitions;
• Templates;
• Communications plan;
• Strategy; and
• Risk breakdown structure.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
