MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS
The effectiveness of Project Risk Management depends upon the way the approved plans are carried out.
These plans should be executed correctly, reviewed, and updated regularly. If this is carried out correctly, the
invested effort will be rewarded and future projects will benefi t from this project’s experience.
9.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Monitor and Control Risks Process
T he primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identifi ed risks, monitor residual risks,
identify new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time, and evaluate their
effectiveness throughout the project life cycle.
I n addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions, the effectiveness of all of the Project
Risk Management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current
project as well as future ones.
F or each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been defi ned, the corresponding set of
trigger conditions should have been specifi ed. It is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these
conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as defi ned, in a timely
manner.
Once the Plan Risk Responses process is complete, all of the approved unconditional response actions
should have been included and defi ned in the current project management plan. The fi rst action of risk
monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary,
such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This will then ensure
that the agreed-upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework.
The risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their
responsibilities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so
that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of specifi c risks,
apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed-upon responses in
a timely manner.
I n addition to the response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness
of the response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The risk action owner should keep the risk
owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been
effectively dealt with, or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
As the project progresses, additional information becomes available and the project environment may
change as some risks occur, whether foreseen or unforeseen, and others become or cease to be relevant.
The planning should therefore be kept current and the project manager should ensure that periodic risk
reassessment, including risk identifi cation, analysis, and response planning, is repeated at reasonable intervals,
or in response to project events—without generating excessive administrative overhead. Typical reasons for
risk reassessment are:
• Occurrence of a major or unexpected risk,
• Need to analyze a complex change request,
• Phase end review,
• Project re-planning or major plan elaboration, and
• Periodic review to ensure that the information remains current.
I n the event of major organizational changes, risk management planning may need to be revisited prior to
reassessing the risks.
In addition to the regular status reviews, periodic audits should be performed to determine strengths and
weaknesses in handling risks within the project. This should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or
keys to success in risk management, recognition of which could lead to improvements in risk management of
the current or future projects.
At the end of the project, an integrated analysis of the risk management process should be carried out
with a focus on long-term process improvements. This analysis consolidates the fi ndings of the periodic
audits to identify lessons that would be applicable in general to a large proportion of the organization’s
projects in the future, such as appropriate levels of resources, adequate time for the analysis, use of tools,
level of detail, etc.
At project closure, the project manager should ensure that a description has been given of the closure of
every risk in the risk register, for example: (a) did not occur; (b) occurred and contingency plan invoked; or (c)
occurred and impact to the project scope (i.e., time, cost, and quality).
T he output of the audit of the risk management process should be consolidated with specifi c information
with respect to the project’s experience of risks, and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization
should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. This can lead to an update to the
corresponding organizational process assets.
An overview of the steps involved in the Monitor and Control Risks process is given in Figure 9-1.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
Figure 9-1. Schematic Representation of the Monitor and Control Risks Process
9.2 Critical Success Factors for the Monitor and Control Risks Process
C ritical success factors relate to maintaining risk awareness throughout the project and include the
characteristics and capabilities detailed in Sections 9.2.1 through 9.2.3.
9.2.1 Integrate Risk Monitoring and Control with Project Monitoring and Control
From the start, the project management plan should include the actions required to monitor and control
project risk. This should be set up early in the project planning cycle, and then adjusted in view of the risk
response planning decisions adding, for example, the actions associated with monitoring specifi c conditions
or metrics. Once risk response planning has been carried out, the project schedule should include all of the
agreed-upon, response-related actions so that they can be carried out as a normal part of project execution
and tracked accordingly.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
9.2.2 Continuously Monitor Risk Trigger Conditions
R isk response planning will have defi ned a set of actions to be carried out as part of the project schedule
as well as actions whose execution is dependent on a predefi ned trigger condition. Checking for specifi cally
defi ned risks that may trigger conditional responses is the responsibility of the risk action owner, in close
collaboration with the risk owner under the overall authority of the project manager.
9.2.3 Maintain Risk Awareness
Risk management reports should be a regular item on every status meeting agenda to ensure that all team
members remain aware of the importance of risk management and to ensure that it is fully integrated into all
of the project management decisions.
The project’s senior-level sponsor should require regular reports on the risks and the planned responses
to ensure that stakeholders are aware of the importance of keeping a focus on risk. Sponsor feedback also
motivates the project team by demonstrating senior-level interest in Project Risk Management.
S takeholders’ perception of the effectiveness of risk management is conditioned in part by the way in
which risks are handled as they occur, and by the number or characteristics of such events. It is therefore
crucial, whenever a risk occurs, that information about the event, as well as the progress and effectiveness of
the responses, be communicated at regular intervals and in an honest manner adapted to the needs of each
stakeholder. This should be supported by a well-executed communications plan.
9.3 Tools and Techniques for the Monitor and Control Risks Process
In addition to standard project management monitoring and control capabilities, risk monitoring and
controlling requires a focus on the tools which will support its key success factors for tracking overall risk as
well as individual risks.
9.3.1 Managing Contingency Reserves
Reserves may have been allocated separately to cover time-related and cost-related risks. Techniques
are required that allow the project manager to assess at any point in the project whether these provide the
required level of confi dence in the success of the project.
Tools for managing time buffers should be closely integrated into the project’s scheduling techniques,
whereas those for managing cost should be compatible with the fi nancial practices. Tools are required to
identify trends and forecast future outcomes to determine whether the reserves will remain suffi cient. Tools
are also required for tracking progress and spending in a consolidated manner.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
9.3.2 Tracking Trigger Conditions
T rigger conditions and the corresponding metrics are defi ned during the Plan Risk Responses process.
Tools are required to evaluate and track these conditions against the project baseline or specifi ed thresholds,
based on actual status. They can be chosen to provide information on risks related to the deliverables, such as
performance, as well as on project-related features, such as time and cost.
9.3.3 Tracking Overall Risk
Tools are required in order to determine, as the project progresses, whether the responses are having the
expected effect on the project’s overall level of risk.
9.3.4 Tracking Compliance
I n order to monitor the quality of the execution of the risk-related plans and processes, a set of quality
metrics such as degree of variation from the baseline, should be tracked and recorded. These metrics will
normally have been defi ned in the risk management plan.
9.4 Documenting the Results of the Monitor and Control Risks Process
T he fi nal control action of risk monitoring and controlling is to record actual data for future use. This includes
all of the relevant information relating to risk management from start to fi nish of the project. The defi nition of
what this information must include, as well as the storage mechanism, should have been previously specifi ed
in the risk management plan.
The goal is to ensure that the signifi cant risk management information is recorded to provide concrete data
to the lessons learned process for inclusion in a lessons learned document, report, or other communication
vehicle. Typical information includes the following:
• For each identifi ed risk or type of risk, whether it occurred, and, if so, when and how often. All
relevant data should be recorded: impact, effectiveness of detection and of response, and any
unplanned, additional actions that were carried out.
• Effectiveness of avoidance or exploitation actions.
• Effectiveness of transfer and sharing actions.
• Unexpected or undocumented risks which occurred and data about them.
• Effectiveness of risk mitigation and enhancement actions.
• Occurrence of accepted threats or opportunities.
C onsolidated information should be provided on the level of effort expended. Costs and benefi ts to the
project of risk management activities should also be provided.
T his information will need to be archived and indexed in a manner that will facilitate retrieval for easy
review during the project, at closure, and for future projects, when the need arises.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
A
APPENDIX A
GUIDELINES FOR A PMI PRACTICE STANDARD
A.1 Introduction
A PMI practice standard is characterized as follows:
(cid:129) E ach practice standard provides guidelines on the mechanics (e.g., nuts and bolts, basics,
fundamentals, step-by-step usage guide, how it operates, how to do it) of some signifi cant process
(input, tool, technique, or output) that is relevant to a project manager.
(cid:129) A practice standard does not necessarily mirror the life-cycle phases of many projects; however, an
individual practice standard may be applicable to the completion of one or more phases within a
project.
(cid:129) A practice standard does not necessarily mirror the Knowledge Areas within A Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK ® Guide– Fourth Edition), although an individual practice
standard will provide suffi cient detail and background for one or more of the inputs, tools and
techniques, and/or outputs. Therefore, practice standards are not required to use the name of any
Knowledge Area.
(cid:129) E ach practice standard should include information on what the signifi cant process is and does,
why it is signifi cant, how to perform it, when it should be performed, and, if necessary for further
clarifi cation, who should perform it.
(cid:129) Each practice standard should include information that is accepted and applicable for most projects
most of the time within the project management community. Processes that are generally restricted or
applicable to one industry, country, or companion profession (i.e., an application area) may be included
as an appendix for informational purposes, rather than as part of the practice standard. With strong
support and evidence, an application area-specifi c process may be considered as an extension practice
standard, in the same manner as extensions to the PMBOK ® Guide –Fourth Edition are considered.
(cid:129) Each practice standard will benefi t from the inclusion of examples and templates. It is best when an
example or template includes a discussion of its strengths and weaknesses. A background description
may be necessary to put this discussion in the appropriate context. The examples should be aligned with
the relevant information in the standard or its appendix and placed in proximity to that information.
(cid:129) All practice standards shall be written in the same general style and format.
(cid:129) E ach practice standard project will be aligned with or reference other practice standards, as needed.
(cid:129) Each practice standard will be consistent with the P MBOK ® Guide –Fourth Edition.
(cid:129) Each practice standard is intended to be more prescriptive than the PMBOK ® Guide –Fourth Edition.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
B
APPENDIX B
EVOLUTION OF PMI’S PRACTICE STANDARD FOR
PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
B.1 Pre-Project
I n early 2005, PMI began exploration for developing the fi rst Practice Standard for Project Risk Management.
Focus would be placed on single project risk management for a single project rather than including programs
or portfolios of projects, with close coupling to the Project Risk Management section of A Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide) – Third Edition. By April 20, 2006, the PMI Standards
Members Advisory Group (MAG) approved the following fi nal charter for the standard, with Cynthia A. Berg,
PMP, as the Project Manager, and Dr. David Hulett as the Deputy Project Manager. The charter included the
following characteristics for the standard:
• P rovides information on Project Risk Management that includes information that is clear, complete,
relevant, and generally recognized as good practice on most projects most of the time.
• I s consistent with the PMBOK ® Guide – Third Edition, expanding but not contradicting, the concepts
and techniques related to Project Risk Management, and keeps within the limits and practices of
Project Risk Management as described within Chapter 11 of the P MBOK ® Guide– Third Edition.
• Has been reviewed and updated by the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
Project Team.
• I s written for project management practitioners and other stakeholders of the project management
profession.
• Describes the processes that are unique to Project Risk Management.
• Includes in an appendix, examples and templates of specifi c Project Risk Management processes,
tools, and/or techniques addressed in the practice standard, with discussions of their strengths and
weaknesses, including background descriptions that put the relative strengths and weaknesses into
context.
• Uses the PMBOK ® G uide – Third Edition Glossary as the starting point of its glossary, and does not
contain contradictions.
• Uses a glossary term in the text without defi nition or additional explanation.
• Is aligned with and does not contradict other PMI standards.
• Follows the PMI Style Guide, is written in North American English, translatable to PMI offi cial
languages, and is sensitive to cultural issues.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
B
APPENDIX B
• C an be approved as a PMI standard, which means that in addition to the content being acceptable,
the process for selecting team members and soliciting and responding to comments on the product
must be open and inclusive.
B.2 Preliminary Work
In recognition that risk management is not practiced well on many projects, the project team set out to
identify practices that are viewed as best practices, as those are understood, and applied in most successfully
managed projects most of the time.
T he project core team was initially formed in the fall of 2005 and consisted of; Dr. David Hillson PMP, Kik
Piney, and Kris Persun.
B.3 Scope Changes
During the time the project was chartered, the P MBOK ® G uide – Fourth Edition was commissioned. As a
result, the charter of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management was expanded to be consistent and
non-contradictory with that standard.
B.4 Exposure and Consensus
The standard was submitted as an exposure draft in the winter of 2007, and exposed on 23 March 2008.
There were 849 comments. The team’s comment acceptance rate (comments accepted outright, and accepted
with modifi cations) was 57%. The PMI Standards Manager submitted the resultant fi nal draft, with the
concurrence of the PMI Standards Program MAG, to the PMI Standards Program Consensus Body for offi cial
ballot on 27 March 2009. Twenty-eight members of the PMI Standards Program Consensus Body agreed to
participate in the ballot of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management. Those not participating included
the PM and Deputy PM for this standard because their participation was considered a confl ict of interest. The
balloting period was closed on 25 April 2009 with 23 ballots returned. Consensus Body voting results were
as follows: 22 affi rmative and 1 affi rmative with comment. The affi rmative with comment pertained to future
revisions of the standard and possible improvements to the comment adjudication process.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
CONTRIBUTORS AND REVIEWERS OF THE PRACTICE STANDARD
FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
This appendix lists, alphabetically within groupings, those individuals who have contributed to the
development and production of the P ractice Standard for Project Risk Management . No simple list or even
multiple lists can adequately convey all the contributions of those who have volunteered to develop the P ractice
Standard for Project Risk Management .
T he Project Management Institute is grateful to all of these individuals for their support and acknowledges
their contributions to the project management profession.
C.1 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Project Core Team
T he following individuals served as members, were contributors of text or concepts, and served as leaders
within the Project Core Team (PCT):
Cynthia Ann Berg, PhD, PMP Project Manager
David T. Hulett, PhD, Deputy Project Manager
Dr. David Hillson FRSA, FIRM
Kristine Persun, MA, PMP
Crispin “Kik” Piney, BSc, PMP
Kristin L. Vitello, Standards Project Specialist
Nan Wolfslayer, AStd, Standards Compliance Specialist
C.2 Signifi cant Contributors
I n addition to the members of the Project Core Team and the Sub-Team Leaders, the following individuals
provided signifi cant input or concepts:
Jeannette Horne
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
C.3 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Team Members
In addition to those listed above, the following individuals participated on the P ractice Standard for Project
Risk Management Project Team.
Ahmad Khairiri Abdul Ghani, PE, MBA Archie Addo, PMP, PhD
Priumvada Agarwal, PMP Upinder Aggarwal, PMP
Asif M Ahmad, PMP Amr Nabil Ahmed, PMP, MSc
Jose Correia Alberto, MEng, CITP Salvador Alvarez, PMP
Chukwudi Anakudo, PMP Ananthalakshmi Anbuselvan
Jagathnarayanan Angyan, FIE, CE Rodrigo Ariza
Pedro Carlos Auler Michael Avery
Sai Swaminathan Baba Subramanyan, BE, PMP Teddy Alton Barnes
Gail Ellen Bartz David Benfell
Paul S. Bennett Douglas A. Berry, PMP
Mamoun Besaiso, CE Timothy Birus
Dave M. Bond Kiron Bondale
Blaine W. Boxwell, MBA, PMP Carlos Eduardo M. F. Braga, PMP
Valerie Claire Brasse, PMP Joan Browne, BSc, PMP
Adrian Busch, PMP, MBA John J. Byrne, DBA, PMP
C. S. Rajan, PMP Eduardo Cadena
Franco Caron William G. Chadick, DM, PMP
Souray Chakraborty Harshavardhan Chakravarti, BS
Shanthi Chandrasekar Noman Zafar Chaudry, PE, PMP
Vijay Chauhan, MBA, PMP Subrahmanyam Chinta, VN, PMP
Carolyn Chomik Joan F. Church
Glenda Clark Lorri Cline, MBA, PMP
John D. Corless, PhD Anthony R. Corridore, PMP
Coughlin, Philip Nancy A Cygan, MS, PMP
Marco Aurélio Danelon, PMP Karel de Bakker, MA, PMP
Thijs De Jong Alfredo Del Cano
Peter B. de Zouza Mello, SPS, PMP Cheryl L. Dennis
Raveesh Dewan, PMP, MBA Ricardo Jose do Rego Barros, PMP
John David Driessnack Matt Dubois
Jason Eddinger, PMP Maliha Elahi, MSc, PMP
Norman Epstein, PMP, MBA Joel Erickson
Rodrigo Fernandes Espirito Santo Giovanni Fanduiz
Geneviève Faragó, PMP Mario Fiallo Carranco
Leslie Fiedler Eduardo Fleischer
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
Kirby Fortenberry, PMP Lynn Francis
Michelle L. Franklin, PMP Tracy Fritz
Andrew Fry, CMA, PMP Kamlesh Gandhi, PMP, PQs
Nélio Gaspar, MSc, PMP Tina Gilrein, PMP, MPM
Silvio Hernan Giraldo, PMP, CBCP Vikram Godboley
Vivek Goel, PMP Francisco Gomez
Serge Goncharov, PMP, PgMP Ronald R.Goodwin, PMP
Priyesh Gopalakrishnan Robert Grant
Steve Grunewald Denise M. Guerin
Sanjay Gupta, PMP Cristine Gusmão, PhD
Heidi Ann Hahn, PhD, PMP Laurie Hall
Robert W. Harding, PMP Balasubramaniam Hari Gopal, FCA, PMP
Chandrashekar Hassan Henry Hattenrath
David A. Haugh, PMP John Hendricks, MS, PMP
Arnold A. Hill, PMP Rosemarie A. Hilt, MBA, PMP
George Hopman, PhD, PE Sean Hugo
John Humphrey Walter Hussey, PMP
George Jackelen Ramona Jackson
Dhanojkumar Jadhav Ayo Jemiri, MS, PMP
Stephen Michael Johns Kenneth E. Johnson, MBA, PMP
Valeri Jonas, BA (Honours), Oxon Roy Joslin
Krishna Kallapur, PMP Rita Kaul
Mariya Kehoe Rameshchandra B. Ketharaju
Amir Ahmed Kheir Behrad Kiafar
Konstantinos Kirytopoulos, PhD, PMP Ilkka Koskinen, MSc, PMP
Alejandro Kowiendl R.V. Krishna, MBA, CAPM
Jeyakumar Krishamoorthy Lars Kruse
Polisetty Veera Subrahmanya Kumar, CISSP, CISA Sasi Kumar, PMP
Vijaya Kurada Elise Labre
David Larson Wei Lee, PMP
Henry Lie Guilherme Pereira Lima, PMP
Bernard Lindekens Renato Lourenço da Silva, MBA, PMP
Vasantha R Manda, PMP, CISSP Edmond Matevosian, PE, PMP
Rivalino Matias Jr., PhD, MSc Peña Torres Nestor Mauricio, PMP
JME Maxwell MBA, PMP Alvis McGinty
Traci L. McIntosh, PMP Ramesh Menon
Concepcion Merino Philip Mileham
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
Waqar Ahmed Mirza Shipra Mitra
Siddique Mohammed Guillermo Molina Leon
Sergio Monaco, MCTS Elizabeth Mejia Montanez
Flavio Montenegro, PMP Mohammad Moradi
Linda L. Morgan, MSIS, PMP Rick A. Morris, MPM, PMP
Tania Morris MPM, PMP Saradhi Motamarri, MTech, PMP
Mark A. Munster PMP, CISA Ronan J. Murphy, CEng, MBA
Carlo Muzzarelli Linda Nedney, PMP
Rob Nelson, PMP Vaman G. Nene
Ann Nguyen, PMP Naema Nunnery
Jillian O’Connell, MBA, PMP Daryl K. Ono
Armin Oppitz, PMP Daniel Pacholski, PMP
Abhimanyu Parasher, MBA, PMP David M. Patrick
Scott Patton Mridul Paul
Chris Payne, PMP Sameer K Penakalapati, ME, PMP
Alexandre Perali Sharon D. Perez-Suarez
Lavinia Petcu, CAPM Bruce Petro, PMP
Krista Lynn Pizzurro Roberto Pons, PMP
Carl Pro Julie R. Purcell, PMP, MCSE
Sridhar R Pydah, MS, PMP Vijaya Raman, PMP
Stephen F. Randolph, PMBA PMP Jennifer Read, PMP, CMC
Caroline Robison, PMP Fabiano Rollim, PMP, PgMP
Edward Rowe Don Ruchkall
Joseph Sabatini Fawzia Salahuddin MCS, PMP
Salem Mahaboob Saliha Sherriff, MBA, PMP Sivakumar Sanyasi
Rudolf Schenker Marcio Schmidt, PMP
Bill Schneider Michael J. Scott, PMP
Ravi Shanker, MBA, PMP Viresh C Shah, MBA, PMP
Jeff Shore Evandro Silva
Maria Isabel Silva Sumano, MBA, PMP Michael D. Simants
Vivek Sivakumar, CAPM Kathy J. Slater, PMP
Shaun Smith Linda E. Solorzano, BS, PMP
Mauro Sotille, PMP Mandayam Sriram, Meng, PMP
Tournis Stamatis, PhD PMP Fred Stein
Roeland Stellingwerff Jim Stewart, PMP
Prasanna V Sugavanam, PMP Ramakrishnan Sundararaman
Matthias Svane, MSc, PMP Amin Tabatabayi, MBA, PMP
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
Venerando Tangco, PMP, CSM Suresh Kumar Tata, PMP, ACS
Patel Tejesh, PMP Sarma Tekumalla, PMP, MBA
Jacqueline Teo Michelle Tessier
Gangesh Thakur, CPIM, PMP Vadivelu Thanicachalam
Ing. Biagio Tramontana, PMP Subhash B. Tuladhar, PMP
Ruth H. Vandegrift Sri Pavan Vardan Vemu
Christoph Verschuere, Ir, PMP, CISM Marianne Viegas
Yiannis Vithynos, PMP, MSc Steve Waddell
Paul Waits Jr., PMP, CPM Kuan-Hsun Wang, PMP
Nancy Watanabe James Wattnem
Lisa L. Winchester, PMP Karen L. Woodruff, RN CFNP, PMP
James Yang, PMP, MBA Luay M. Zakaria, PMP
Xiaojun Zhou
C.4 Final Exposure Draft Reviewers and Contributors
I n addition to team members, the following individuals provided recommendations for improving the
Exposure Draft of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management :
Marcos Abreu Billa S. Dahaby, MS, ISSI
José R. Alcalá G., PMP Gwendolyn Darby
Mohd Al-Kuwari Anirban Das, M.Tech, PMP
Ondiappan Arivazhagan “Ari”, PMP, PMI-RMP Terrell G. Dorn, PE
Randall Ash, PMP Peggy Drew, MBA, PMP
Imad Babbili Norberto Figuerola, PMP
Ernest Baker, PMP Robert A. Dudley, PMP, PMI-SP
Jerry Ball, PMP Scott D. Freauf, PMP, IPMA-D
Eng. Dimah M. Barakat, PMP, PMI-RMP Mark Gabel, MSCE, PE
Suvransu Basu, BE Oliver D. Gildersleeve, Jr., PMP, MCTS
Susanne Bode Kurt J. Harris, PMP
David J. Boschma PMP B.E. Jame Healy
Sergio A. Calvo Abarca, PMP Walter Hekala, CQA, PMP
Marlene Carnevali Shirley Hinton, PMP
Bruce C. Chadbourne, PMP, PgMP Felicia Elizabeth Hong, PMP, MBA
Steve Charters MAPM MSc Manuel Huerta
Tomio Chiba, PMP Kristian Hurt
Patricia Cohen Christoph Werner Jacobi
Wendra Collet, MPM Ashok Jain, PMP, ITIL
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
Syed Asad Jawed C.C.E Dirk Pons
Ramesh D. Kandadai, member RSIG Carl L. Pritchard, PMP, PMI-RMP
Kenneth P. Katz PMP Javier Pumar, PMP
Rameshchandra Ketharaju Polisetty Veera Subrahmanya Kumar, PMP, PMI-RMP
Gene G. Kuki, PMP Chandrasekar Ramakrishnan PMP, CSQA
Abhilash T. Kuzhikat, PMP, ITIL Ivan D. Ramirez R., PMP
Peter Lierni Alexander Revin, PMP
Christopher E. Maddox, PMP Pedro C. Ribeiro, MBA, PMP
Anthony Mampilly, PMP, COP Bruce P. Robison
Srinivas Mandgi, PMP, SAP HR Sadegh Roozbehi
Ammar W. Mango, PgMP, PMP Tarun Kumar Roy
Larry Marks Balaji Selvaraju
Andrew McGlade, PMP Hilary Shreter, MBA, PMP
Patrick K. Morrow, PMP Fay Simcock MSc, PMP
Rajesh Musaliyath Rebecca Spohn, PMP, CQE
Eric M. Myers, PMP Pranay Srivastava, PMP, CSM
Mustapha NAFAÂ, MPM, PMP Joyce Statz, PhD, PMP
Patrick O’Farrell, PMP, MBA Massimo Torre, PhD, PMP
Lambert I. Ofoegbu, PMP, PMI-RMP Fredrick G. Trussell, PMP
Kazuhiko Okubo, PMP, PE Frederick Trussell
Karthikeyan Ovuraj Kevin R. Wegryn, PMP, CPM
Nancy Perosio, PMP William. E. Wencel, PMP
Rafael Piña Quintal Alexey D. Zimin, PME
C.5 PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG)
The following individuals served as members of the PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG) during
development of the P ractice Standard for Project Risk Management :
Julia M. Bednar, PMP Chris Cartwright, MPM, PMP
Douglas Clark Terry Cooke-Davies, PhD FCMI
Carol Holliday, MA, PMP Deborah O’Bray, CIM (Hons)
Asbjørn Rolstadås, PhD, Ing David W. Ross, PMP, PgMP
Paul E. Shaltry, PMP David Violette, MPM, PMP
John Zlockie, MBA, PMP
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
C
APPENDIX C
C.6 Staff Contributors
Special mention is due to the following employees of PMI:
Steven L. Fahrenkrog, PMP, VP Regional Development
Amanda Freitick, Standards Program Administrator
Ruth Anne Guerrero, MBA, PMP, Former Standards Manager
Donn Greenberg, Manager, Publications
Roberta Storer, Product Editor
Barbara Walsh, CAPM, Publications Planner
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
TOOLS, TECHNIQUES AND TEMPLATES FOR
PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
Many tools and techniques have been developed and are in widespread use to support the Project Risk
Management processes. The most commonly used of these are listed in the following tables along with their
strengths, weaknesses, and critical success factors. Where a technique can be used in more than one Project
Risk Management process, it is described in detail in the section associated with the main process that it
supports, and referred to as necessary for other processes to which it can be of use. Examples and templates
shown after each table provide illustrations of the most common and good practice uses of these tools and
techniques. This information is not intended to explain the tools and techniques but to list them with certain
important characteristics. Those who are interested in learning more are encouraged to seek other sources
such as handbooks, textbooks, or courses in project risk management.
D.1 Techniques, Examples and Templates for
Risk Management Planning (Chapter 4)
P lan Risk Management defi nes the approach to be followed for managing the risks throughout the lifespan
of the corresponding project.
D.1.1 Techniques
An example of an approach is given in Table D1.
Table D1. Example of Plan Risk Management Approach
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Planning Meetings and • Involvement of core • Depends on • Prior risk management
Analysis team members experience of plan templates
participants • Prior stakeholder
analysis
• Existing organizational
guidelines for risk
management
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.1.1.1 The Risk Management Plan – Purpose and Typical Content
D epending on the size and complexity of the project, some or all of the following elements will be present
in a risk management plan.
• Introduction
• Project Description
○ Project objectives
○ External dependencies
○ Stakeholder analysis
• Risk Management Scope and Objectives
○ Variance thresholds
○ Prioritization of project objectives
○ Thresholds, weights and other parameters
■ Definition of criteria for “unacceptable threats” and “un-missable opportunities”
■ Impact scales, probability scales, PxI matrices, weighting of project objectives,
prioritization and selection criteria, degree of confidence required for overall risk
(e.g., 80t h percentile) from quantitative risk analysis
• Risk Management Methodology
○ Relationship with the organizational environment
○ Risk management activities
■ Link to the project management methodology
■ Relationship with other project management processes
○ Risk taxonomy/risk breakdown structure (either generic or project-specific)
○ Format of a fully defined risk statement description (“metalanguage”)
○ Key deliverables
• Risk Management Organization
○ Roles, responsibilities and levels of authority for risk management
■ Rules of escalation
○ Budgeting for risk management activities added to the project budget
■ Adapted to the complexity and sensitivity of the project
○ Scheduling of risk management activities in the project schedule, i.e. when certain actions
or reviews need to be carried out (frequency, life cycle related, etc.)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
○ Reporting
■ Governance-related rules of reporting and disclosure
• Use of Tools
○ Tool name, description, usage
○ Structure of the risk database
■ Requirements in terms of system resources
• Communications Planning
○ Documents, usage, rules for distribution (frequency, audience, etc.)
○ Document templates
■ Risk register
■■ Risk status reports
D.1.1.2 Templates Relevant to Risk Management Planning
T he risk management plan should provide a number of templates for use by the other processes. These
may include:
• Formal structure for a risk statement
○ An example is given below
• Means of categorizing risks, for example a risk breakdown structure
○ An example is given in the Identify Risks section of this appendix
• Defi nitions, by project objective, of probability and impact scales
○ An example is given in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis section of this appendix
• Risk prioritization and selection guidelines
○ T hese guidelines may be used in Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis and in Perform Quantitative
Risk Analysis as well as in Plan Risk Response Planning. An example is given below.
• Status report templates
• Typical agenda for status meetings
D.1.1.3 Risk Statement “Metalanguage”
I n order for all risks to be clearly defi ned, a standard structure for the way in which the risk is described
should be specifi ed and applied. A typical such statement is:
“Because of <one or more causes>, <risk> might occur, which would lead to <one or more effects>”.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.1.1.4 Risk Prioritization and Selection Guidelines
T he selection and prioritization of risks must be linked to the project objectives. The risk management plan
will defi ne the relative importance to be assigned to these objectives (e.g. reliability takes precedence over
time, etc.): this may be in the form of numerical “weights” that can be applied to create a single weighted sum
over all objectives for each risk. Any other features that may affect the urgency of dealing with a risk should
also be specifi ed (e.g. one linked to a resource that will soon disappear should be given greater urgency).
D.2 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Identify Risks (Chapter 5)
I dentify Risks is carried out in order to develop a comprehensive list of all knowable uncertainties that could
have an effect on the project’s objectives.
Table D2. Identify Risks
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Assumptions & • Simple structured • Implicit/hidden • Requires a
Constraints Analysis approach assumptions or comprehensive list
• Can be based on constraints are often of assumptions &
assumptions & missed constraints
constraints already
listed in project charter
• Generates project-
specifi c risks
Brainstorming • Allows all participants • Requires attendance of • Attendance of
to speak their mind key stakeholders at a representative group of
and contribute to the workshop, therefore can stakeholders
discussion be diffi cult to arrange • Commitment to honesty
• Can involve all key and expensive • Preparation
stakeholders • Prone to Groupthink and
• Good facilitation
• Creative generation of other group dynamics
• Use of structure
ideas • May produce biased
(e.g. categories or RBS)
results if dominated by
a strong person (often
management)
• Often not well facilitated
• Generates non-risks
and duplicates, requires
fi ltering
Cause and Effect • Visual representation • Diagram can quickly • Effective selection of
(Ishikawa) Diagrams of project promotes become over-complex critical impacts (e.g.
structured thinking by use of sensitivity
analysis)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Table D2. Identify Risks (continued)
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Check Lists • Captures previous • Check list can grow to • Regular maintenance is
experience become unwieldy required
• Presents detailed list • Risks not on the list will • Use of structure can
of risks be missed assist (e.g. RBS)
• Often only includes
threats, misses
opportunities
Delphi Technique • Captures input from • Limited to technical risks • Effective facilitation
technical experts • Dependent on actual • Careful selection of
• Removes sources of expertise of experts experts
bias • May take longer time than • Clear defi nition of scope
available due to iterations
of the experts’ inputs
Document review • Exposes detailed • Limited to risks • Understanding of
project-specifi c risks contained in project relevance of prior
• Requires no specialist documentation experience
tools
FMEA/Fault Tree • Structured approach, • Focuses on threats, • Detailed description
Analysis well understood by not so useful for of the area being
→ see Chapter 7 engineers opportunities assessed
• Produces an estimate • Requires expert tools not • Statistically accurate
of overall reliability generally available to data on fault
using quantitative tools those except experts probabilities for many
• Good tool support events
Force Field Analysis • Creates deep • Time-consuming and • Prioritized objectives
understanding of complex technique
factors that affect • Usually only applied to a
project objectives single objective, so does
not provide whole-project
view
Industry knowledge • Captures previous • Limited to what has • Access to relevant
base experience previously happened information
• Allows benchmarking • Excludes project-specifi c
against external risks
organisations
(continued)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Table D2. Identify Risks (continued)
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Influence diagrams • Exposes key risk drivers • Requires disciplined • Identify key areas to
• Can generate counter- thinking address
intuitive insights not • Not always easy to
available through other determine appropriate
techniques structure
Interviews • Addresses risks in • Time consuming • Good interviewing and
detail • Raises non-risks, questioning skills
• Generates concerns, issues, worries • Environment of trust,
engagement of etc, so requires fi ltering openness, confi dentiality
stakeholders • Preparation
• Open relationship
between interviewer
and interviewee
Nominal Group • Encourages and allows • Can lead to frustration in • Good briefi ng of all
Technique all participants to dominant members who participants in the
contribute feel it is moving slowly technique
• Allows for different • Strict facilitation
levels of competence
in common language
• To a large extent, auto-
documenting
• Provides ideal base for
affi nity diagramming
(grouping by risk
categories for use in
the Risk Breakdown
Structure and Root
Cause Analysis)
Post-project reviews/ • Leverages previous • Limited to those risks that • Well structured project
Lessons Learned/ experience have occurred previously lessons learned
Historical Information • Prevents making the • Information is frequently database
→ see Chapter 6 same mistakes or incomplete: details • Participation of previous
missing the same of past risks may project team members
opportunities twice not include details of (ideally including the
• Enhances the successful resolution; project manager)
Organizational Process ineffective strategies are
Assets rarely documented.
Prompt Lists • Ensures coverage of • Topics can be too high • Choice of list relevant
all types of risk level to the project and its
• Stimulates creativity environment
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Table D2. Identify Risks (continued)
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Questionnaire • Encourages broad • Success depends on the • Clear and unambiguous
thinking to identify quality of the questions questions
risks • Limited to the topics • Detailed briefi ng of
covered by the questions respondents
• Can be a simple
reformatting of a checklist
Risk Breakdown • Offers a framework for • None • Requires a
Structure (RBS) other risk identifi cation comprehensive RBS,
techniques such as often tailored to the
brainstorming project
• Ensures coverage of
all types of risk
• Tests for blind spots or
omissions
Root-Cause Analysis • Allows identifi cation of • Most risk management • Ability to identify if a
→ see Chapter 6 additional, dependent techniques are organized risk is an outcome of
risks by individual risk. This a more fundamental
• Allows the organization organization is not cause
to identify risks conducive to identifying • Willingness by
that may be related the root causes management to
because of their • Can oversimplify and accept and address
common root causes. hide existence of other the root cause rather
• Basis for development potential causes than adopting partial
of pre-emptive and • There may be no valid workarounds
comprehensive strategy available for
responses addressing the root
• Can serve to reduce cause once it has been
apparent complexity identifi ed.
SWOT Analysis • Ensures equal focus • Focuses on internally • Good facilitation
on both threats and generated risks arising • Strict adherence to
opportunities from organizational the technique, to avoid
• Offers a structured strengths and confusing the four
approach to weaknesses, excludes SWOT perspectives
identify threats and external risks (i.e. between Strengths
opportunities • Tends to produce high- and Opportunities, or
• Focus on internal level generic risks, not between Weaknesses
(organizational project-specifi c and Threats)
strengths and
weaknesses) and
external (opportunities
and threats)
(continued)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Table D2. Identify Risks (continued)
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
System Dynamics • Exposes unexpected • Requires specialized • Understanding of
→ see Chapter 715 inter-relations between software and expertise to feedback
project elements build models • Competence in applying
(feedback and feed- • Focuses on impacts but tools and understanding
forward loops) diffi cult to include the their output
• Can generate counter- concept of probability • Quality of the system
intuitive insights not model
available through other
• Accuracy of input
techniques
data collected for the
• Produces overall specifi c project
impacts of all included
events and risks
WBS Review • Ensures all elements • Excludes external risks • Good WBS
of the project scope or those not specifi cally
are considered related to WBS elements
• Provides for risks
related to different
levels of detail (from
high-level to those
related to individual
work packages)
D.2.1 Techniques
Examples of techniques are given in D.2.1.1 through D.2.1.15.
D.2.1.1 Assumptions and Constraints Analysis
This technique requires three steps:
1. List assumptions and constraints for the project
2. Test assumptions and constraints by asking two questions:
a. Could the assumption/constraint be false?
b. If it were false, would one or more project objectives be affected (positively or negatively)?
3. Where both questions are answered “Yes”, generate a risk, for example in the form: <Assumption/
constraint> may prove false, leading to <effect on objective(s)>.
The results can be documented in table form, as shown in Figure D1.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Figure D1. Example of a Constraint Analysis with Fields for Description and Analysis Results
D.2.1.2 Brainstorming
Brainstorming is commonly used in a facilitated risk identifi cation workshop to identify risks. The standard
rules of brainstorming are often modifi ed when the technique is applied to risk identifi cation. For example it
is common to structure the risk identifi cation brainstorm using risk categories or a risk breakdown structure.
Some evaluation of proposed risks is often included in a risk identifi cation brainstorm to remove non-risks. It is
important to ensure active participation of relevant stakeholders in a risk identifi cation brainstorm, and for the
facilitator to manage group dynamics carefully. No templates or examples are presented in this appendix.
D.2.1.3 Cause and Effect (Ishikawa) Diagrams
T his technique presents in diagrammatic form the causes which contribute to a given outcome. Each main
cause can be split further into sub-causes. To use this technique for risk identifi cation the outcome should be stated
as an effect on a project objective, i.e. the impact of a risk. The diagram then identifi es risks as those uncertain
events which could result in occurrence of the impact. Care needs to be taken when using this technique for
risk identifi cation to distinguish between risks (uncertain causes of the impact) and issues (certain causes of the
impact). An example cause and effect (Ishikawa) diagram is shown below: the risk (effect) to be analyzed is “staff
leaving the project”; the main causes are Environment, Ambition, Career Prospects, Satisfaction, Remuneration.
Figure D2. Example of a Cause and Effect or Ishikawa Diagram for Staff Leaving
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.2.1.4 Checklists
C hecklists are compiled to capture previous project experience and allow it to be used for subsequent similar
projects. It is possible to structure the risk identifi cation checklist around a risk breakdown structure, as shown
in the partial example below. It is useful to present the checklist as a set of risks, each of which is considered in
turn to determine whether it might be relevant to the project under consideration. Risk identifi cation checklists
should include both threats and opportunities.
.
Figure D3. Example (Fragment) of a Checklist with Typical Structure of Category, Subcategory,
Specific Risks and Effect
D.2.1.5 Delphi Technique
The Delphi technique uses a facilitated anonymous polling of subject matter experts to identify risks in their
area of expertise. The facilitator gathers the experts’ initial responses and circulates them without attribution
to the group, who may revise their contributions based on those of others. The process often generates a
consensus of the experts in a few iterations. No templates or examples are presented.
D.2.1.6 Document Review
Risks can be identifi ed through careful review of project documentation, including the project charter,
statement of work, contract terms and conditions, subcontracts, technical specifi cations, regulatory
requirements, legal stipulations etc (where relevant). Formal structured methods of document review can be
used (such as the Fagan Inspection Process), or a more informal approach may be adopted. No templates or
examples are presented.
D.2.1.7 FMEA/Fault Tree Analysis
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) or Fault Tree Analysis is the analysis of a model structured to
identify the various elements that can cause system failure by themselves, or in combination with others,
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
based on the logic of the system. Fault tree analysis is typically used in engineering contexts. It can be adapted
for use to identify risks by analyzing how risk impacts might arise. Another result is the probability of failure
(or of reliability, mean time between failure, etc.) of the overall system, indicating the level of quality of the
system or product. If the level of reliability is not acceptable, the Fault Tree can indicate where the system can
be made more reliable—therefore, it is useful in the design and engineering phase of the project. An example
is shown below.
Figure D4. Fault Tree Analysis of the Possible Causes of a Crash at the Main Road Junction
(this will be changed to be more project-oriented)
D.2.1.8 Force Field Analysis
Force Field Analysis is typically used in the change management context. It can be adapted for risk
identifi cation by identifying driving forces (“forces for change”) and restraining forces (“forces against change”)
which currently affect achievement of a project objective. Risks can then be identifi ed as uncertain events or
conditions which would lead to a change in the strength of one or more of the identifi ed forces. An example
force fi eld diagram is shown below.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Figure D5. Example of a Force Field Analysis and the Balance of Forces For and Against Change
D.2.1.9 Industry Knowledge Base
An industry knowledge base is a special case of a checklist (see above), and is used similarly. No templates
or examples are presented.
D.2.1.10 Infl uence Diagrams
An infl uence diagram is a diagrammatic representation of a project situation, showing the main entities,
decision points, uncertainties, and outcomes, and indicating the relationships (infl uences) between them. The
infl uence diagram can identify risks when combined with sensitivity analysis or Monte Carlo simulation to
reveal sources of risk within the project. An example is shown below.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Figure D6. Example of an Influence Diagram in a Bidding Situation
D.2.1.11 Interviews
R isk identifi cation interviews should include all main stakeholders and be conducted by an independent
skilled interviewer using a structured agenda, in an atmosphere of confi dentiality, honesty, and mutual trust. A
risk breakdown structure, checklist or prompt list can be used as a framework for risk interviews. No templates
or examples are presented.
D.2.1.12 Nominal Group Technique
T he Nominal Group Technique is an adaptation of brainstorming where participants share and discuss all
issues before evaluation, with each participant participating equally in evaluation. No templates or examples
are presented.
D.2.1.13 Post-Project Reviews/Lessons Learned/Historical Information
I nformation relevant to risks for a current project can be obtained by reviewing databases of risks which
occurred in previous similar situations. Such databases might arise from post-project reviews or lessons
learned exercises. They may also exist as repositories of historical information, either within an organization or
industry body. No templates or examples are presented.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.2.1.14 Prompt Lists
A prompt list is a set of risk categories which can be used to stimulate risk identifi cation. The prompt list
may be presented as a risk breakdown structure (see below), or as a set of headings. A number of standard
prompt lists have been developed for use in risk identifi cation, and some of these are presented below. These
can then be used as a framework for other risk identifi cation techniques such as brainstorming (see D.2.1.2)
or risk interviews (see D2.1.11).
1. The PESTLE prompt list:
• Political
• Economic
• Social
• Technological
• Legal
• Environmental
2. The TECOP prompt list:
• Technical
• Environmental
• Commercial
• Operational
• Political
3. The SPECTRUM prompt list:
• Socio-cultural
• Political
• Economic
• Competitive
• Technology
• Regulatory/legal
• Uncertainty/risk
• Market
D.2.1.15 Questionnaire
A risk identifi cation questionnaire can be presented as a special form of checklist (see D.2.1.4), where
possible risks are shown in question format (for example “Is the client’s requirement clearly defi ned?”) rather
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
than as risk statements (“The client may change the requirement after project start.”). Alternatively a risk
identifi cation questionnaire can be used to present the headings from a prompt list (see D.2.1.14), asking
questions such as “Are there any uncertainties arising from the use of technology on this project?” No templates
or examples are presented.
D.2.1.16 Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)
T he risk breakdown structure (RBS) is a hierarchical framework of potential sources of risk to a project. An
organization may develop a generic RBS for use across all its projects, or a project may use a project-specifi c
RBS. A partial example RBS is shown below.
Figure D7. Example of a Generic Risk Breakdown Structure
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.2.1.17 Root-Cause Analysis
A root cause analysis seeks to identify basic causes of risks that may be visible symptoms of more
fundamental forces. It may also identify common sources of several risks, leading to broad-reaching risk
response strategies. Similarly, care needs to be taken when using this technique for risk identifi cation to
distinguish between risks (uncertain causes of the impact) and issues (certain causes of the impact). In the
diagram shown below the risks that were initially identifi ed included rework, extra cost, schedule slips, low
team morale, customer mistrust and repeated audits. An examination of the identifi ed risks lead to a common
root cause, that later phases of the project were typically started before the earlier ones were suffi ciently
mature. This organization repeatedly ignored the proper phase entry prerequisites, hastening later project
stages in order to speed up the project.
Figure D8. Example of a Root Cause Analysis
D.2.1.18 SWOT Analysis
SWOT Analysis identifi es four characteristics of a given situation: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats. The technique is commonly used in strategic decision making. It can be adapted for risk identifi cation
by changing the interpretation of the four perspectives, such that strengths and weaknesses relate to the
characteristics of the organization conducting the project, and opportunities and threats identify the project
risks. The technique is particularly useful for identifying internally-generated risks arising from within the
organization. For example opportunities might be found by leveraging organizational strengths, or threats
might arise as a result of organizational weaknesses, as illustrated below.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Figure D9. Example of a SWOT Analysis Structure
D.2.1.19 System Dynamics
System dynamics (SD) is a particular application of infl uence diagrams (see above), and can be used
to identify risks within a project situation. The SD model represents entities and information fl ows within a
project, and analysis of the model can reveal feed-back and feed-forward loops which lead to uncertainty
or instability. In addition, the results of an SD analysis can show the impact of risk events on overall project
results, such as the cost or schedule results to be expected. Analyses of changes in the model or assumptions
can indicate the system’s sensitivity to specifi c events, some of which may be risks. A simple example of an
SD diagram is shown in Figure D11.
Figure D10. Example of a Simple System Dynamics Model with Feedback Loops
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.2.1.20 WBS Review
T he work breakdown structure (WBS) for a project can form a framework for a number of other risk identifi cation
techniques, such as brainstorming, risk interviews, checklists or prompt lists. No templates or examples are presented.
D.3 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis (Chapter 6)
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis prioritizes for further analysis or handling the undifferentiated list of risks
that have been identifi ed in the Identify Risks process. Organizations tend to apply resources to those designated
as “high risk,” based on their priority, often indicated by the risks’ probability and impact characteristics.
D.3.1 Techniques for Perform Qualtitative Risk Analysis
Example of approaches are given in Table D3 and D.3.1.1 through D.3.1.3.
Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
CSFs For Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Root Cause Analysis
See Chapter 5
Estimating techniques • Addresses both • Diffi cult to calibrate if • Agreed defi nitions
(applied to probability key dimensions of there is no historical of probability and
and impacts) a risk, namely its database of similar impacts which
degree of uncertainty events refl ect stakeholders’
(expressed as • Terms for probability risk tolerances and
probability) and its (e.g. probable, thresholds
effect on project almost certain) and • Values used in
objectives (expressed for impact (e.g. the defi nitions
as impact) insignifi cant, major) represent the same
are ambiguous and level of impact
subjective across objectives
• Impacts can as perceived by
be uncertain or the organization’s
represented by a management or
range of values that project stakeholders
cannot be put into a • Consistent use of
specifi c impact level these defi nitions
such as “moderate across all identifi ed
impact on time” risks
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (continued)
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
• Access to SMEs who
have experience with
the type of risk
Post-project reviews/
Lessons Learned/
Historical Information
→ see Chapter 5
Probability and Impact • Allows the organization • Does not explicitly • P×I matrix requires
Matrix (P-I Matrix) to prioritize the handle other factors that the input
project risks for such as urgency or data are clear and
further analysis (e.g., manageability that unambiguous in
quantitative) or risk may partly determine assigning levels of
response a risk’s ranking. probability and impact
• Refl ects the • The range of • E ffective estimation of
organization’s level of uncertainty in the impact and likelihood
risk tolerance assessment of a as outlined previously
risk’s probability or • Organizations should
impact may overlap a be careful to assess
boundary the combinations of
probability and impact
that qualify a risk
as low, moderate or
high risk so that the
method used refl ects
the organization’s risk
attitude
• Defi nitions used to
designate the levels
of impact (L, M, H)
for each objective
should represent
the same level of
impact as perceived
by the organization’s
management or
project stakeholders
as refl ecting the
organization’s utility
function
(continued)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (continued)
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Analytic Hierarchy • Assists in developing • Organizational • Expert facilitator in
Process a relative weighting decisions are often the process
for project objectives made by committees, • Agreement by
that refl ects the and individuals may management that it
organization’s not agree on relative is useful to develop
priorities for time, priority among a consistent set of
cost, scope and objectives priorities among
quality for the project • Diffi cult to gather the objectives
• Assists the creation information about • Use of proper method
of an overall project pair-wise comparison or available AHP
priority list of risks of the objectives software
created from the from high-level
risks’ priority with management
respect to individual
objectives
Root-Cause Analysis
→ see Chapter 5
D.3.1.1 Estimating Techniques Applied to Probability and Impact
The probability of a risk occurring can be specifi ed in several different ways. One common way is to assign
levels of risk probability by ranges of probability. One benefi t of this approach is that the subject matter experts
only need to assess a risk’s probability within a range rather than as a specifi c value. An example, assuming
that a 5×5 Probability and Impact Matrix is desired, is shown in Figure D11 where the probability ranges are
more tightly defi ned at low levels of probability.
Examples of impact level defi nitions are very project-specifi c. The values used to specify the level of impact
from very low to very high (if a 5×5 matrix is being used) should be:
• H igher impact, for threats or opportunities, as they move from very low to very high for a specifi c
objective
• L evels are defi ned by the organization as causing the same amount of pain or gain to the project for
each level across objectives
• I f a risk’s possible impact is uncertain and could be assigned to more than one level of impact (e.g.
from moderate to high) the analyst may choose to assign the risk to the impact level that represents
the expected or average impact. Alternatively, the risk may be fl agged for extra analysis in order to
reduce the range of uncertainty to fi t within a single range.
A n example of impact level defi nitions is shown in Figure D11. These defi nitions should be tailored or scaled
by stakeholders to the specifi c project. The defi nitions, appropriately tailored to the project, can be used for
opportunities and threats.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Figure D11. Example of Definitions for Levels of Probability and Impact on Four Specific Objectives
Used to Evaluate Individual Risks.
N ote—Opportunities are to be treated as representing a positive saving in time or cost, or increased
functionality. For threats, each impact scale is interpreted negatively, i.e. time delays, increased cost, or
reduced functionality.
D .3.1.2 Probability and Impact Matrix
Organizations typically assess a risk’s priority on an objective from the combination of probability of
occurrence and impact on that project objective, using defi nitions such as those shown in Figure D11. Risks
are then placed on a probability and impact (P-I) matrix, such as one shown below. This matrix includes both
threats and opportunities.
Figure D12. Example of Probability-Impact Matrix Used to Sort Risks (Threats and Opportunities) into
High Risk (H), Moderate Risk (M) and Low Risk (L) Classes
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.3.1.3 Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP)
A HP is a method to calibrate preferences for achieving the different objectives of a project. Do they prefer
to achieve time more than cost? Is quality more important than scope? What is the relative weighting of the
project’s objectives in terms of their priority to the stakeholders or to management? The results are weights
(summing to 100%) that refl ect the relative priority of each objective. This prioritization can be important in
determining how trade-offs affecting different objectives (e.g., Should we reduce scope to fi nish on time?)
will be decided. It can also be used to create an overall project risk priority list from risks that have been
assessed on their implications for individual objectives. Specialized software implementing AHP is available. A
spreadsheet implementation is shown below.
Figure D13. Example of Analytic Hierarchy Process Computations to Determine the Relative Weighting
of Four Project Objectives
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.4 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis (Chapter 7)
P erform Quantitative Risk Analysis seeks to determine the overall risk to project objectives when all risks
potentially operate simultaneously on the project. It provides answers to several questions:
• H ow likely is the project to complete on the schedule date or earlier? How likely is the project actual cost
to be the budgeted cost or less? How reliable will the product be that the project produces? What is the
best decision to make in the face of uncertain results?
• H ow much contingency in time and cost is needed to provide the organization with its desired degree of
confi dence in the results? How should the design of the product or system be changed most economically
to increase its reliability?
• What are the individual risks that seem to be the most important in determining the overall project risk?
D.4.1 Techniques for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
Examples of techniques for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis are found shown in Table D4 and details are
given in D.4.1.1 through D.4.1.5
CSFs For effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses application
Decision Tree Analysis • Causes the • It is sometimes • Careful structuring of
organization to diffi cult to create the the decision tree. All
structure the costs decision structure alternative decisions
and benefi ts of • Probabilities of that are materially
decisions when occurrences can be different should be
the results are diffi cult to quantify considered; decision
determined in part by in the absence of trees should be
uncertainty and risk historical data specifi ed completely
• Solution of the • The best decision may • Access to high-quality
decision tree helps change with relatively data about probability,
select the decision plausible changes in cost and reward for
that provides the the input data, meaning the decisions and
highest Expected that the answer may events specifi ed using
Monetary Value or not be stable historical information
expected utility to the or judgment of
• The organization may
organization experts
not make decisions
based on a linear • Use of a utility
Expected Monetary function that has
Value basis but rather been validated with
on a non-linear utility the organization’s
function; utility functions decision makers
are diffi cult to specify
(continued)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
• The organization may • Availability and
not make decisions understanding of the
based on a linear specialized software
Expected Monetary needed to structure
Value basis but rather and solve the
on a non-linear decision tree
utility function. Utility
functions are diffi cult
to specify
• Decision tree analysis
of complicated
situations requires
specialized (though
available) software
• There may be some
resistance to using
technical approaches
to decision-making
Expected Monetary Value • EMV allows the user • Assessment of • Identifi cation of all
(EMV) to calculate the probability of risky possible events that
weighted average events’ occurring and need to be included in
(expected) value of an of their impact can be the EMV calculation
event that includes diffi cult to make • Access to historical
uncertain outcomes • EMV provides only data or expert
• It is well-suited to the expected value opinions on the
Decision Tree Analysis of uncertain events; values of probability
• EMV incorporates risk decisions and impact that
both the probability often require more are needed for the
and impact of the information than EMV calculation of EMV
uncertain events can provide • Understanding of the
• EMV is a simple • EMV is sometimes difference between
calculation that used in situations EMV and the output
does not require where Monte Carlo of simulation tools
specialized software simulation would be such as Monte Carlo
more appropriate and analysis
provide additional
information about risk
FMEA/Fault Tree Analysis
→ see Chapter 5
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs For Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Monte Carlo Simulation • Used primarily for • Schedules are • Creation of a good
project schedule and not simple and project model. Typical
cost risk analysis in often cannot be models include the
strategic decisions used in simulation cost estimate and the
• Allows all specifi ed without significant schedule
risks to vary de-bugging by an • Use summary-level
simultaneously expert scheduler models such as
• Calculates • The quality of the project schedules and
quantitative estimates input data depends cost estimates
of overall project risk; heavily on the expert • Access to high-
refl ects the reality judgment and the quality data on risks
that several risks may effort and expertise of including the risk’s
occur together on the the risk analyst impact on project
project • Simulation is elements, uncertain
• Provides answers sometimes resisted activity durations
to questions such by management as and uncertain
as (1) How likely is being unnecessary cost elements; the
the base plan to be or too sophisticated credibility depends on
successful? (2) How compared to the quality of the data
much contingency traditional project collected
in time and cost do management tools • Use of correct
we need to achieve • Monte Carlo simulation tools
our desired level of simulation requires
confi dence? specialized software
(3) Which activities which must be
are important in acquired and learned,
determining the causing a barrier to
overall project risk? its use
• Will produce
unrealistic results
unless input data
include both threats
and opportunities
Post-project reviews/
Lessons Learned/
Historical Information
→ see Chapter 5
System Dynamics
→ see Chapter 5
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.4.1.1 Decision Tree Analysis
Decision tree analysis is usually performed using specialized, but widely available software. The software
allows the user to specify the structure of the decision with decision nodes, chance nodes, costs, benefi ts, and
probabilities. The user can also evaluate the different decisions using linear utility functions based on Expected
Monetary Value or on non-linear utility functions of various shapes. An example is shown below where:
• The negative numbers represent outfl ows or investments (e.g. COTS)
• The percentages represent probabilities of the event occurring (e.g., Major Problems)
• The positive numbers represent rewards or values (e.g., after “Fix the Problem”)
• “True” indicates the decision option taken from the square decision node, whereas “false”
indicates the decision option not taken
Figure D14. Example of a Decision Tree for Choosing between an Experimental Technology vs.
Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS) Technology
Source: Precision Tree from Palisade Corporation
D.4.1.2 Expected Monetary Value
Expected Monetary Value (EMV) is a simple calculation of a value such as weighted average or expected cost
or benefi t when the outcomes are uncertain. All reasonable alternative outcomes are identifi ed. Their probabilities
of occurring (summing to 100%) and their values are estimated. The EMV calculation is made for the entire event
by weighting the individual possible outcomes by their probabilities of occurring, as shown in Figure D15.
D.4.1.3 Monte Carlo Simulation
Monte Carlo simulation is a detailed, computer-intensive simulation approach to determining the value and
probability of possible outcomes of a project objective such as a project schedule (e.g., the completion date) or
cost estimate (e.g., the total cost). It computes the schedule or cost estimate many times using inputs drawn at
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
Figure D15. Example of an Expected Monetary Value Calculation when there are Three Uncertain
Product Demand Scenarios
random from ranges specifi ed with probability distribution functions for schedule activity durations or cost line-
items. The solutions using these different input values are used to build a histogram of possible project outcomes
and their relative probability, and cumulative probability from which to compute desired contingency reserves of
time or cost. Additional results include the relative importance of each input in determining the overall project cost
and schedule. Examples of the output of schedule and cost risk results are shown in Figures D16 and D17.
D.4.1.4 Monte Carlo Analysis of Finish Dates in Quantitative Schedule Risk Analysis
Figure D16. Example Histogram from Monte Carlo Simulation of a Project Schedule
Source: Pertmaster v. 8.0 Primavera Pertmaster
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.4.1.5 Monte Carlo Analysis of Project Cost at Completion in Quantitative Cost Risk Analysis
Figure D17. Example Histogram from Monte Carlo Simulation of a Project Cost Estimate
Source: Crystal Ball v. 7.3.8 from Oracle Hyperion (Decisioneering)
D.5 Techniques, Examples, and Templates for Plan Risk Responses
(Chapter 8)
P lan Risk Responses develops the set of actions required to take into account the project’s risks and
their characteristics, and integrates them into the corresponding project management plan. The resultant plan
should satisfy the risk appetites and attitudes of the key stakeholders.
D.5.1 Techniques for Plan Risk Response
Techniques for Plan Risk Responses are given in Table D5 and Sections D.5.1.1 through D.5.1.5.
Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFS for Effective
Application
Brainstorming
→ see Chapter 5
Check Lists
→ see Chapter 5
Contingency planning • Ensures that actions • Can give a false feeling • The trigger conditions
are available to address of confi dence – as must be clearly
signifi cant events if the risk had been defi ned and tracked
before their occurrence avoided
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
• Allows rapid and • The plans need to be
focussed response validated periodically
• Improves image of • Willingness of the
professionalism of organization to
the way in which the execute the plan and
project is managed provide the budget
and resources when
the trigger condition
occurs
Contingency reserve • Provides a rationale • Makes the reserve • Policy for reserve
estimation for reserves visible and therefore management agreed
• Basis for constructive liable to be reduced with sponsor and
discussion with arbitrarily senior management
sponsor
Critical Chain Project • Along with many other • Feeding buffers can • Requires a fully
Management (CCPM) approaches, insists deal with predictable resourced project
on resolving resource common cause schedule
availability issues variation, but may be • Understanding of,
when developing the inadequate to cater and acceptance
schedule for special causes by management
• Addresses schedule • “Indicative” start and project team
risk by the addition and end dates can members that the
of “feeding buffers” disturb conventional activity dates are
to absorb statistical management indicative rather than
variations on the expectations, defi nitive promises,
durations of non-critical and may cause being generally set
path activities to reduce problems for to provide a 50%
their contribution to setting intermediate confi dence level
schedule risk milestones • Equitable sharing
• Partly mitigates • Assumption that base of the buffers by
fi nancial risk by estimates represent all team members
controlling the amount 50% confi dence concerned
of “work in process” levels (this weakness
• “Buffer penetration” is not followed in all
thresholds can be used variants of this class
as trigger condition of tool)
for specifi c response • Not all project
actions schedules are fully
• Special software is resourced
available for creating
and managing the
buffers
(continued)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Decision Tree Analysis • Allows calculation
→ see Chapter 7 of the expected
monetary values of
various response
options as well as the
value of the outcomes
in the worst case and
the best case
Delphi Technique • Involves selected
→ see Chapter 5 experts in the process
Expected Monetary • Provides an estimate
Value (EMV) of the potential
benefi t of a risk
→ see Chapter 7
response
Force Field Analysis • The diagram can
→ see Chapter 5 suggest where best to
apply the responses
Industry knowledge base • Some risks have
→ see Chapter 5 standard responses
Interviews • Experienced
→ see Chapter 5 practitioners can
provide both new
ideas and act as
“devil’s advocate” for
potential responses
Nominal Group • Useful as a creativity
Technique technique for
generating novel
→ see Chapter 5
responses
Multi-criterion selection • Provide a means • Can give counter- • Needs an agreed set
techniques of selecting the intuitive results of weighted project
responses that best success criteria
supports the full set
of project objectives
Post-project reviews/ • Leverages previous
Lessons Learned/ experience
Historical Information
→ see Chapter 5
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Prompt Lists • Stimulates creativity
→ see Chapter 5
Quantitative Risk • Provides a means • Can be too involved • Prior effective
Analysis of evaluating the or complex for the qualitative analysis
potential effect benefi t envisaged
→ see Chapter 7
of the response
plans on the overall
project risk
Root-Cause Analysis • Allows the
→ see Chapter 5 organization
to identify and
to address the
fundamental
causes of risks
for effi cient and
effective responses;
responding at
the level of the
root cause may
effectively address
multiple risks
• Can provide a
means of identifying
symptoms for use
as trigger conditions
for contingent
responses
Scenario Analysis • Provides view of the • Adds to the list of • All participants need
potential effect of assumptions a good understanding
the relevant risk and • Can be time of the project plans
the corresponding consuming
response strategy
• Forces the
participants to
analyze the effect of
any strategy
• Helps to identify
secondary risks
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.5.1.1 Contingency Planning
For specifi c (normally high-impact) risks, the risk owner may choose to assemble a team to develop a
response, as if the risk had genuinely happened. The corresponding plan, with the supporting information,
should then be documented and approved at project management or sponsor level. This approval must include
authorization to deploy the corresponding resources if the predefi ned trigger conditions arise. No templates or
examples are presented.
D.5.1.2 Contingency Reserve Estimation
A ll of the conditional response plans, as well any of the residual risks will, if they occur, have an effect on the
schedule and/or budget and/or performance objectives of the project. An amount (time and cost) needs to be
set aside to allow for these eventualities. This amount is made up of two components: those to cover specifi c,
approved conditional responses (e.g. contingency plans), and those to address unspecifi ed or passively accepted
risks. Quantitative methods (see chapter 7) can be used to determine the amounts that should be set aside (e.g.
decision trees for conditional responses, simulation for the set of unspecifi ed risks). These reserves are tracked
and managed in Monitor and Control Risks (chapter 9). No templates or examples are presented.
D.5.1.3 Multi-Criteria Selection Techniques
T his is an adaptation of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process (chapter 6) based on selection criteria.
The example below shows the use of a spreadsheet to calculate the weighted scores of two options, based on
a predefi ned set of prioritized criteria: “points” is the product of “weight” by “rating.”
Figure D18. Example of Comparing Options by their Ratings Along Four Prioritized Criteria
D.5.1.4 Scenario Analysis
Scenario analysis for risk response planning involves defi ning several plausible alternative scenarios (e.g.
no change and all goes to plan, disaster occurs, utopia etc). The different scenarios may require different risk
responses that can be described and evaluated for their cost and effectiveness. If the organization can choose
between scenarios, the alternatives including the responses can be compared. If the scenarios are out of the
control of the organization, the scenario analysis can lead to effective and necessary contingency planning.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
No template is offered for this technique.
D.5.1.5 Critical Chain Project Management
A simple critical chain network is shown in Figure D19.
Figure D19. Simple Critical Chain Network
D.6 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Monitor and Control Risks
(Chapter 9)
M onitor and Control Risks provides the assurance that risk responses are being applied, verifi es whether
they are effective and as necessary initiates corrective actions.
D.6.1 Techniques for Monitor and Control Risks Process
Techniques for Monitor and Control Risks are given in Table D6 and D.6.1.1 through D.6.1.6.
TABLE D6. Monitor and Control Risks Example
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Critical Chain Project • Use of buffer
Management (CCPM) penetration to trigger
actions such as
→ see Chapter 8
adjusting the relative
priority of tasks
(continued)
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Reserve Analysis • Provides a means of • Could lead to • Prior detailed reserve
tracking spend and unwarranted focus on planning
releasing contingency cost dimension • Accurate sizing of
amounts as risks • Attention to overall the contingency
expire; can be applied measure of reserve reserve of time or
to schedule reserves depletion may hide cost relative to the
in the same way detailed risks risk to overall project
• Gives early warning of completion date and
need to communicate budget
with sponsor
Risk Audits • Provide a formal • Can be disruptive to • Well-specifi ed risk
assessment of the the project and taken management plan
compliance with the as too judgemental to • Sensitivity to the
approach specifi ed in the project team burden it places on
the risk management the project team
plan
Risk Reassessment • Forces a review of • Takes time and effort • Well-maintained
the project risks project and risk
when it becomes documentation
necessary so that the scheme
risk register remains
up-to-date
Status Meetings • Provide a means of • Can seem • Good meeting
verifying information unnecessary to some preparation and
about the status participants discipline
of risks (active,
occurred, retired) and
maintaining team
understanding
Trend Analysis • Provides an indication • Requires • Regular reporting and
of the effectiveness of understanding of analysis of the critical
earlier responses signifi cant vs. non- values
• Can provide trigger signifi cant variation
conditions for
responses
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
CSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses Application
Variance Analysis • Allows comparison • Does not show • Realistic prior
between forecast and relationship with defi nitions of
actual risk impacts earlier data thresholds for
• Can provide trigger • The values can be “signifi cant variance”
conditions for taken out of context
responses
• Provides data
for Earned Value
Analysis which can
be compared to
quantitative risk
analysis results
D.6.1.1 Reserve Analysis
An analytical technique to determine the essential features and relationships of components in the
project management plan to establish a reserve for the schedule duration, budget, estimated cost, or
funds for a project. Tracking the state of the reserve through project execution will provide summary
information as to the evolution of the status of the corresponding risks. This information can be useful
when reporting up the organization to those responsible for several projects. In addition, once a
corresponding risk occurs or ceases to be current (i.e. when it can no longer impact the project), the
corresponding reserve needs to be reviewed in order to assess whether it still provides the agreed level
of confidence.
Time buffers can be used in two different ways:
• To provide for accepted schedule risks, as described above or
• As a scheduling-related technique in critical chain project management (CCPM).
In contrast with the contingency reserve for identified risks, the buffers in CCPM provide a shared
mechanism for accommodating the natural variability of activity durations over a sequence (or chain) of
activities. Tracking the rate at which each such buffer is used during project execution provides valuable
information at a given point in time as to the level of schedule risk along that chain, and is used in
CCPM for adapting the priority or management focus for additional analysis and as necessary triggering
further risk management activities.
No templates or examples are presented.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
D.6.1.2 Risk Audits
Risk audits are carried out in order to evaluate:
• Are the risk management rules being carried out as specifi ed ?
• Are the risk management rules adequate for controlling the project ?
No templates or examples are presented.
D.6.1.3 Risk Reassessment
The objective of risk reassessment is to ensure that the full risk management cycle is repeated as required
to ensure effective control. See Figure D20.
Figure D20. The Risk Reassessment Process
D.6.1.4 Status Meetings
Risks can and should be on the agenda at all project reviews. Typically, the agenda items should cover the
following:
• Top priority risks at present.
○ Are there any changes?
• Risks or trigger conditions that have occurred .
○ What is the status of the actions?
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
D
APPENDIX D
• Risks responded to in the last period .
○ Effectiveness of actions taken .
○ Are there any additional actions required?
• Risks closed in the last period .
○ Impact on the plans .
• Lessons to be added to the Organizational Process Assets .
D.6.1.5 Trend Analysis
The evolution of the variance values over time should be analyzed in order to evaluate how the risk profi le
is changing, whether previous actions are having the expected effect and whether additional actions are
required. The Earned Value formulae of the “to complete performance index” can be used to assess changes
with respect to time and cost. No templates or examples are presented.
D.6.1.6 Variance Analysis
The formulae in Earned Value Analysis (CV, SV, CPI, SPI) can be used to set thresholds for action, and to
indicate when the risk process may be ineffective. Earned value management systems (EVMS) use variance
from plan as the basis of forecasts or extrapolations to the cost at completion. Projections made using EVMS
have been shown by experience to be reliable early in the project, e.g., 20% into the execution. No templates
or examples are presented.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
E
APPENDIX E
REFERENCES
A ssociation for Project Management. 2004. P roject risk analysis & management (PRAM) guide (second edition).
High Wycombe, Bucks UK: APM Publishing, ISBN 1-903494-12-5.
AS/NZS 4360:2004. Risk management. Published jointly by Standards Australia, Homebush NSW 2140,
Australia, and Standards New Zealand, Wellington 6001, New Zealand, ISBN 0-7337-5904-1.
BS6079-3:2000. Project Management—Part 3. Guide to the management of business-related project risk .
London, UK: British Standards Institute, ISBN 0-580-33122-9.
BS31100:2007 Code of practice for risk management . London, UK: British Standards Institute.
B S/IEC 62198:2001 Project risk management—Application guidelines. London, UK: British Standards Institute,
ISBN 0-580-390195.
B SI/PD ISO/IEC Guide 73:2002. Risk management vocabulary—Guidelines for use in standards. London, UK:
British Standards Institute, ISBN 0-580-401782.
IEEE Standard 1540-2001. Standard for software life cycle processes—Risk management . Piscataway, NJ,
USA: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., 2001.
Institute of Risk Management (IRM), National Forum for Risk Management in the Public Sector (ALARM) and Association
of Insurance and Risk Managers (AIRMIC). 2002. A risk management standard. London UK: IRM/ALARM/AIRMIC.
Institution of Civil Engineers, Faculty of Actuaries and Institute of Actuaries. 2005. R isk Analysis & Management
for Projects (RAMP) (second edition) . Westminster, London, UK: Thomas Telford, ISBN 0-7277-3390-7.
ISO 31000. R isk management—Guidelines on principles and implementation of risk management . Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.
J IS Q2001:2001(E). 2001. Guidelines for development and implementation of risk management system .
Japanese Standards Association.
CAN/CSA-Q850-97. Risk management: Guideline for decision-makers. Ontario, Canada: Canadian Standards
Association. ISSN 0317-5669.
Project Management Institute. 2004. A guide to the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK® Guide) —
Third Edition. Newtown Square, PA USA: Project Management Institute.
UK Offi ce of Government Commerce (OGC). 2007. Management of risk—Guidance for practitioners . London,
UK: The Stationery Offi ce, ISBN 0-11331038-2.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
GLOSSARY
Assumptions. Assumptions are factors that, for planning purposes, are considered to be true, real, or
certain without proof or demonstration. Assumptions affect all aspects of project planning and are part of the
progressive elaboration of the project. Project teams frequently identify, document, and validate assumptions
as part of their planning process. Assumptions generally involve a degree of risk.
Benefi t. Positive effect on a project objective arising from the occurrence of an opportunity.
Bias. During information gathering about risk, the source of information exhibits a preference or an inclination
that inhibits impartial judgment. Types of bias which commonly affect the risk process include cognitive and
motivational bias.
Cause. Events or circumstances which currently exist and which might give rise to risks.
Consequence. See im pact .
Constraint. The state, quality, or sense of being restricted to a given course of action or inaction. An applicable
restriction or limitation, either internal or external to a project, which will affect the performance of the project
or a process.
Contingency Reserve. The amount of funds, budget, or time needed above the estimate to reduce the risk of
overruns of project objectives to a level acceptable to the organization.
Contingency Plan. A plan developed in anticipation of the occurrence of a risk, to be executed only if specifi c,
predetermined trigger conditions arise.
Decision Tree Analysis. The decision tree is a diagram that describes a decision under consideration and the
implications of choosing one or another of the available alternatives. It is used when some future scenarios or
outcomes of actions are uncertain. It incorporates probabilities and the cost or rewards of each logical path of
events and future decisions, and uses expected monetary value analysis to help the organization identify the
relative values of alternative actions.
Effect. Conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project objectives if the
associated risk happened.
Emergent Risk. A risk which arises later in a project and which could not have been identifi ed earlier on.
Identify Risks. The process of determining which risks may affect the project and documenting their
characteristics.
Impact. A measure of the effect of a risk on one or more objectives if it occurs. Also known asc onsequence .
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
GLOSSARY
Individual Risk. A specifi c uncertain event or condition which, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
at least one project objective.
Issue. See p roblem .
Likelihood. See p robability .
Monitor and Control Risks. The process of implementing risk response plans, tracking identifi ed risks, monitoring
residual risks, identifying new risks, and evaluating the risk process throughout the project life cycle.
Monte Carlo Analysis. A technique that computes or iterates the project cost or project schedule many times
using input values, selected at random from probability distributions of possible costs or durations, to calculate
a distribution of possible total project cost or completion dates.
Objective. Something toward which work is to be directed, a strategic position to be attained or a purpose to
be achieved, a result to be obtained, a product to be produced, or a service to be performed.
Opportunity. A condition or situation favorable to the project, a positive set of circumstances, a positive set
of events, a risk that will have a positive impact on project objectives, or a possibility for positive changes.
Contrast with threat .
Overall Project Risk. Overall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Overall
project risk is more than the sum of individual risks on a project, since it applies to the whole project rather
than to individual elements or tasks. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations
in project outcome measured in terms of the corresponding objectives.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. The process of prioritizing risks for further analysis or action by assessing
and combining their probability of occurrence and impact.
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. The process of numerically analyzing the effect of identifi ed risks on
overall project objectives.
Plan Risk Management. The process of defi ning how to conduct risk management activities for a project.
Plan Risk Responses. The process of developing options and actions to enhance opportunities and to reduce
threats to project objectives.
Probability. A measure of how likely an individual risk is to occur. Also known asl i kelihood .
Problem. Negative effect on a project objective arising from occurrence of a threat.
Project Risk Management. Project Risk Management includes the processes concerned with conducting
risk management planning, identifi cation, analysis, responses, and monitoring and control on a project. The
purpose of Project Risk Management is to increase the probability and impact of positive events and decrease
the probability and impact of events adverse to project objectives.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
GLOSSARY
Response Strategy. A high-level approach to address an individual risk or overall project risk, broken down
into a set of risk actions.
Risk. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on a project’s
objectives.
Risk Action. A detailed task which implements in whole or in part a response strategy in order to address an
individual risk or overall project risk.
Risk Action Owner. The person responsible for carrying out the approved risk actions for responding to a
given risk. Also known as “response owner” when the context allows it.
Risk Attitude. A chosen mental disposition towards uncertainty, adopted explicitly or implicitly by individuals
and groups, driven by perception, and evidenced by observable behavior. Risk attitude exists on a continuous
spectrum, but common risk attitudes include risk averse, risk tolerant, risk neutral and risk seeking.
Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) [Tool] A hierarchically organized depiction of the identifi ed project risks
arranged by risk category and subcategory that identifi es the various areas and causes of potential risks. The
risk breakdown structure is often tailored to specifi c project types.
Risk Category. A group of potential causes of risk. Risk causes may be grouped into categories such as technical,
external, organizational, environmental, or project management. A category may include subcategories such as
technical maturity, weather, or aggressive estimating. See also R isk Breakdown Structure (RBS)
Risk Exposure. A measure of overall project risk describing the overall effect of identifi ed risks on objectives.
Risk Management Plan. The document describing how Project Risk Management will be structured and
performed on the project. It is contained in or is a subsidiary plan of the project management plan. The risk
management plan can be informal and broadly framed, or formal and highly detailed, based on the needs
of the project. Information in the risk management plan varies by application area and project size. The
risk management plan is different from the risk register that contains the list of project risks, the results of
risk analysis, and the risk responses.
Risk Metalanguage. A structured description of a risk which separates cause, risk, and effect. A typical risk
description using risk metalanguage might be in the form: “Because of <cause>, <risk> might occur, which
would lead to <effect>.”
Risk Model. A representation of the project including data about project elements and risks that can be
analyzed by quantitative methods.
Risk Owner. The person responsible for ensuring that an appropriate response strategy is selected and
implemented, and for determining suitable risk actions to implement the chosen strategy, with each risk action
assigned to a single risk action owner.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
GLOSSARY
Risk Register. The document containing the results of the qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis,
and risk response planning. The risk register details all identifi ed risks, including description, category, cause,
probability of occurring, impact(s) on objectives, proposed responses, owners, and current status.
Risk Threshold. A measure of the level of risk exposure above which action must be taken to address risks
proactively, and below which risks may be accepted.
Root Cause. An initiating cause that gives rise to a causal chain which may give rise to risks.
Secondary Risk. A risk that arises as a direct result of implementing a risk response.
Stakeholder. Person or organization (e.g., customer, sponsor, performing organization, or the public) that is
actively involved in the project, or whose interests may be positively or negatively affected by execution or
completion of the project. A stakeholder may also exert infl uence over the project and its deliverables.
Threat. A condition or situation unfavorable to the project, a negative set of circumstances, a negative set of
events, a risk that will have a negative impact on a project objective if it occurs, or a possibility for negative
changes. Contrast with opportunity .
Trigger Condition. Circumstance under which a risk strategy or risk action will be invoked.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
