PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS
6.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis Process
T he Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process assesses and evaluates characteristics of individually
identifi ed project risks and prioritizes risks based on agreed-upon characteristics.
Assessing individual risks using qualitative risk analysis evaluates the probability that each risk will occur
and the effect of each individual risk on the project objectives. As such it does not directly address the overall
risk to project objectives that results from the combined effect of all risks and their potential interactions with
each other. This can however be achieved through use of quantitative risk analysis techniques (see Chapter 7).
One step in the analysis is to categorize risks according to their sources or causes. If several risks arise
from a common source, sometimes called a root cause, risk responses may be more effective when they focus
on addressing this root cause.
I dentifying common effects from groups of risks allows identifi cation of the areas of greatest risk exposure
(e.g. to the project completion date, the budget, or a particular deliverable’s scope), facilitating risk response
focus in these areas.
The methods of qualitative risk analysis are applied to the list of risks created or updated by the Identify
Risks process to provide project management with the characteristics of the risks that have the most infl uence
(positive or negative) on achieving the project’s objectives. Risks that are assessed as high priority to either
threaten or to enhance the achievement of project objectives will be an important focus in the Plan Risk
Responses process. They may be further analyzed, such as in the analysis of the overall project risk that is
discussed in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.
6.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis Process
Several factors that lead to successful qualitative risk analysis are described in Sections 6.2.1 through
6.2.4, and summarized in Figure 6-1. Agreement of the project stakeholders is a fundamental criterion and
a common theme. The agreed-upon approach is the foundation of process credibility. Then, agreed-upon
defi nitions enable high-quality information to be collected. Finally, with these conditions in place, the process
can be executed reliably, which contributes to the credibility of its outputs.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
Figure 6 -1. Building Risk Analysis Credibility
6.2.1 Use Agreed-Upon Approach
T he process is based on an agreed-upon approach to this assessment that is applied across all of the
identifi ed risks in any project. By the nature of project risk, all risks may be assessed according to probability
of occurrence and impact on individual objectives should the risk occur. Other factors may be considered in
determining the importance of a risk as follows:
• Urgency (proximity). Risks requiring near term responses may be considered more urgent to
address. Indicators of urgency can include the lead time necessary to execute a risk response and the
clarity of symptoms and warning signs (also known as detectability) that may trigger the response.
• Manageability. Some risks are not manageable and it would be a waste of resources to attempt to
address them. The project team may examine these and decide to:
○ Go forward, perhaps establishing a contingency reserve.
○ Stop or re-scope the project because these risks pose an unmanageable threat or an
opportunity that should not be missed with high probability and consequences.
○ Inform the customer of the risks and ask for a decision from their point of view.
• I mpact external to the project. A risk may increase in importance if it affects the enterprise beyond
the project.
6.2.2 Use Agreed-Upon Defi nitions of Risk Terms
T he risk assessment should be based on agreed-upon defi nitions of important terms, and those defi nitions
should be used consistently when assessing each risk. The use of defi nitions, for example, of levels of probability
and of impact on objectives, assists the providers of the information in giving realistic assessments for each
risk, and facilitates the communication of the results to management and other stakeholders.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
6.2.3 Collect High-Quality Information about Risks
C ollection of high-quality information about risks is required. Often this information is not available in any
historic database and should be gathered by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment. Data
gathered from individuals may be subject to reporting or intentional bias. When this occurs, the bias should be
identifi ed and remedied where possible, or a different, unbiased source of information should be found and used.
6.2.4 Perform Iterative Qualitative Risk Analysis
T he success of qualitative risk analysis is enhanced if the process is used periodically throughout the project. It
is impossible to know in advance all the risks that may occur in a project, therefore the Identify Risks and Perform
Qualitative Analysis processes should be repeated periodically for individual risks. The frequency of this effort will
be planned in the Plan Risk Management process, but may also depend on events within the project itself.
6.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process
T he tools and techniques used for assessing individual risks will identify the risks that are important to the
project’s success. This process is illustrated in Figure 6-2.
Figure 6-2. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
6.3.1 Select Risk Characteristics that Defi ne Risks’ Importance
Q ualitative risk analysis tools provide ways to distinguish those risks that are important for response or
further analysis from those that are less important. The criteria that make a risk of interest to management are
agreed upon in advance and implemented in the tools used. Output from qualitative risk analysis tools includes
a listing of risks in priority order or in priority groups (e.g., high, moderate, and low).
T he tools for qualitative risk analysis allow the organization or project stakeholders to specify those levels
or combinations of risk characteristics that make a particular risk of interest to management. Most tools assess
a risk’s importance from a combination of probability of occurrence and degree of impact on objectives.
6.3.2 Collect and Analyze Data
A ssessment of individual risks is based on information collected about them. Therefore, data collection
and evaluation tools, including interviews, workshops, and references to databases of prior projects, require
management support and attention. It is important to protect against bias in data gathering, which is important
when relying on expert judgment for the information.
6.3.3 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Specifi c Objectives
S ome tools permit distinguishing a risk’s priority in terms of the affected objective. This capability provides
a list of risks that are important for any specifi c objective of interest to management. This is useful since it is
common for risks to have uneven impacts on various project objectives.
6.3.4 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Overall Project
There are reasons for constructing a measure of a specifi c risk’s importance to the entire project as
contrasted with its importance to specifi c objectives. A common reason is for ease of communication with
management and other stakeholders. When a single risk prioritization index is needed, the organization should
be explicit about how that index is created. Usually the index refl ects the organization’s preference among
objectives. The technique for creating the overall risk priority measure should be documented in the Plan Risk
Management process.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
6.3.5 Categorize Risk Causes
Categorizing risks appropriately may lead to improved analysis of the probability and magnitude of
project risk and to effective responses. Understanding the relationships between risks may provide a better
understanding of the possibility and magnitude of project risk than if risks are only considered as separate
and independent events. Identifying common root causes of a group of risks, for instance, may reveal both the
magnitude of the risk event for the group as a whole along with effective strategies that might address several
risks simultaneously. Alternatively, some risks may be linked with others in a causal chain, and understanding
the chain of risks may lead to a better understanding of the implication of risk for the project. Identifying risks
that can occur at the same time or using the same resources for recovery might provide a realistic picture of
problems of risk mitigation using scarce resources.
Combining the results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process with the risk breakdown structure
(see Identify Risks, Chapter 5) can show clusters of priority risks arising from specifi c sources. A combination
of the risk analysis information with the work breakdown structure (WBS) can show which areas of the project
exhibit the most risk. Assessing the high-priority risks’ impact on one objective, such as the schedule, may
indicate which activities to address to reduce that objective’s uncertainty. All of these approaches can contribute
to the realism and usefulness of the qualitative risk analysis.
6.3.6 Document the Results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process
T he Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process adds structure to the list of undifferentiated risks (see Identify
Risks, Chapter 5) into categories of priority. Priorities are usually based on the risk’s probability of occurring
and its potential impact on specifi c project objectives or on the whole project. Each identifi ed risk is assigned
a priority, perhaps by objective or for the entire project. This information is usually stored in the risk register
which is easy to use and update with new information. The risk register list of prioritized risks is posted to the
project participants who are responsible for further analysis or action to improve the project plan. Risks that
are judged to have high priority are segregated for further analysis and response planning and are generally
monitored frequently. Risks of low priority to the project may be placed on a watch list and are reviewed less
often for changes in their status.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
