INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
3.1 Project Risk Management and Project Management
All projects are uncertain. Uncertainty is inevitable since projects are unique and temporary undertakings
based on assumptions and constraints, delivering project results to multiple stakeholders with different
requirements. Project management can be seen as an attempt to control this uncertain environment, through
the use of structured and disciplined techniques such as estimating, planning, cost control, task allocation,
earned value analysis, monitoring and review meetings, etc. Each of these elements of project management
has a role in defi ning or controlling the uncertainty which is inherent in all projects.
P roject Risk Management provides an approach by which uncertainty can be understood, assessed, and
managed within projects. As such it forms an integral part of project management, and effective Project Risk
Management is a critical success factor for project success.
F or project management to be fully effective, however, it is important that Project Risk Management is not
viewed as an optional process or performed as an additional overhead task. Since many elements of project
management address inherent uncertainty, the interface between structured Project Risk Management and the
other processes of project management needs to be clear. The outputs of Project Risk Management should be
taken into account within many of the project management processes. They can, for example, impact:
• Estimating resource requirements, cost, or duration;
• Assessing the impact of proposed scope changes;
• Planning or re-planning the forward strategy of the project;
• Allocating resources to tasks; and
• Reporting progress to stakeholders.
N one of these actions can be performed properly without a clear view of the risk involved, as determined
during the Project Risk Management process. In other words, project management process effectiveness is
increased by using the information and results from Project Risk Management.
I n addition, effective Project Risk Management requires input from other project management processes.
Outputs such as the work breakdown structure (WBS), estimates, the project schedule, assumptions list, etc.
are all important prerequisites for effective Project Risk Management.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
3.2 Project Risk Management Processes
The defi ned steps of Project Risk Management describe a structured approach for understanding and
managing risk on a project. This chapter outlines the steps required for effective Project Risk Management.
Each step is described in more detail in subsequent chapters.
As previously defi ned, project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or
negative effect on a project’s objectives. From this defi nition, it is clear that risks only exist in relation to
objectives. It is therefore essential at the start of the Project Risk Management process to clearly defi ne the
objectives. It is also clear that different projects are exposed to different levels of risk, so each step in the
Project Risk Management process should be scalable to meet the varying degrees of risk. Scalable elements
of the process include:
• Available resources,
• Methodology and processes used,
• Tools and techniques used,
• Supporting infrastructure,
• Review and update frequency, and
• Reporting requirements.
As a precondition for a successful Project Risk Management implementation, it is important to have a clear
understanding of the risk thresholds that defi ne the key stakeholders’ views on acceptable levels of risk, as
well as a framework against which identifi ed risks can be assessed.
A s a result, the Project Risk Management process always starts with an initiation step. This is required in
order to ensure a common understanding and agreement of the team and other stakeholders on the approach
and parameters that will be applied in managing risk in this project, as well as the scope and objectives of the
Project Risk Management process itself. Project Risk Management activities, resources, and attention should
be appropriate to the project since different projects warrant different levels of risk management application.
The main actions to provide the required tailoring are as follows:
• Defi ne those objectives against which risks will be identifi ed,
• Defi ne how the elements of the Project Risk Management process will be scaled for this
project, and
• Defi ne risk thresholds, tolerances, and the assessment framework.
T he outputs from this initial step should be documented, communicated, and then reviewed by the
stakeholders to ensure a common understanding of the scope and objectives for the Project Risk Management
process. The document should be formally approved at a senior level.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
O nce the Project Risk Management scope and objectives are agreed upon, it is possible to start identifying
risks, being careful to distinguish genuine risks from non-risks (such as causes, effects, problems, issues etc.).
A variety of risk identifi cation techniques is available, each with its own strengths and weaknesses. One or
more techniques should be selected as appropriate for meeting the needs of the specifi c project. The aim is
to expose and document all knowable risks, recognizing that some risks will be inherently unknowable and
others will emerge later in the project. The emergent nature of risk requires the Project Risk Management
process to be iterative, repeating the Identify Risks process in order to fi nd risks which were not evident earlier
in the project. Input should be sought from a wide range of project stakeholders when identifying risks, since
each will have a different perspective on the risks facing the project. Historical records and project documents
should also be reviewed to identify risks for this project.
All identifi ed risks are recorded. Ideally, a risk owner is designated for each identifi ed risk. It is the
responsibility of the risk owner to manage the corresponding risk through all of the subsequent Project Risk
Management processes.
Following risk identifi cation, it is necessary to evaluate the importance of each risk, in order to prioritize
individual risks for further attention, evaluate the level of overall project risk, and determine appropriate
responses. Risk evaluation can be performed using qualitative techniques to address individual risks, using
quantitative techniques to consider the overall effect of risk on the project outcome, or using both in combination.
These two approaches require different types of data, but where both qualitative and quantitative techniques
are used, an integrated approach should be adopted.
Qualitative techniques are used to gain a better understanding of individual risks, considering a range
of characteristics such as probability of occurrence, degree of impact on project objectives, manageability,
timing of possible impacts, relationships with other risks, common causes or effects, etc. Understanding and
prioritizing risks is an essential prerequisite to managing them, so qualitative techniques are used on most
projects. The outputs from qualitative assessments should be documented and communicated to key project
stakeholders and form a basis for determining appropriate responses.
Q uantitative techniques provide insights into the combined effect of identifi ed risks on the project outcome.
These techniques take into account probabilistic or project-wide effects, such as correlation between risks,
interdependency, and feedback loops, thereby indicating the degree of overall risk faced by the project. The
result is an indication of the degree of overall risk faced by the project. The results of quantitative analysis
should be used to focus the development of appropriate responses, particularly the calculation of required
contingency reserve levels, and must be documented and communicated to inform subsequent actions.
Quantitative techniques may not be required for all projects to ensure effective management of risk.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
O nce individual risks have been prioritized and the degree of overall project risk exposure is understood,
appropriate risk responses should be developed using an iterative process which continues until an optimal
set of responses has been developed. A range of possible response strategies exists for both threats and
opportunities. The risk owner should select a suitable strategy for each individual risk, based on its characteristics
and assessed priority, ensuring that the strategy is achievable, affordable, cost effective, and appropriate. The
use of a single strategy that addresses several related risks should be considered whenever possible. The risk
owner is responsible for defi ning actions to implement the chosen strategy. These actions may be delegated to
action owners as appropriate. The risk owner should monitor actions to determine their effectiveness, and also
to identify any secondary risks which may arise because of the implementation of risk responses. In addition
to individual risk responses, actions may be taken to respond to overall project risk. All response strategies
and actions should be documented and communicated to key project stakeholders and incorporated into the
project plan.
I t is essential that agreed-upon actions are implemented; otherwise the risk exposure of the project remains
unchanged. It is also vital that the Project Risk Management process be repeated at regular intervals throughout
the life of the project. This will enable the project team to reevaluate the status of previously identifi ed risks,
to identify emergent and secondary risks, and to determine the effectiveness of the Project Risk Management
process.
The steps outlined previously form the Project Risk Management process. These are detailed in subsequent
chapters, as follows:
• Plan Risk Management (Chapter 4) — Defi nes the scope and objectives of the Project Risk
Management process, and ensures that the risk process is fully integrated into wider project
management.
• Identify Risks (Chapter 5) — Identifi es as many knowable risks as practicable.
• Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 6) — Evaluates key characteristics of individual risks
enabling them to be prioritized for further action.
• Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 7) — Evaluates the combined effect of risks on the
overall project outcome.
• Plan Risk Responses (Chapter 8) — Determines appropriate response strategies and actions for
each individual risk and for overall project risk, and integrates them into a consolidated project
management plan.
• Monitor and Control Risks (Chapter 9) — Implements agreed-upon actions, reviews changes in
project risk exposure, identifi es additional risk management actions as required, and assesses the
effectiveness of the Project Risk Management process.
F igure 3-1 shows the fl ow of control and information between the various steps within the Project Risk
Management process.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
Figure 3-1. Project Risk Management Process Flow Diagram
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
