INTRODUCTION
P roject Management Institute (PMI) practice standards are guides to the use of a tool, technique, or process
identifi ed in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK ® G uide – Fourth Edition) or
other PMI standards. Practice standards are targeted at audiences who participate in the management of
projects. This includes project managers, project personnel, contract personnel, supervisors, and other project
stakeholders.
A PMI practice standard describes processes, activities, inputs, and outputs for a specifi c Knowledge Area.
It provides information on what the signifi cant process, tool, or technique is, what it does, why it is signifi cant,
when it should be performed or executed, and, if necessary for further clarifi cation, who should perform the
process. A practice standard does not prescribe how the process is to be implemented, leaving that subject for
other forums such as handbooks, manuals, and courses.
This chapter includes the following sections:
1.1 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
1.2 Project Risk Management Defi nition
1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management
1.4 Good Risk Management Practice
1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
1.1 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
T he purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management is to ( a ) provide a standard for project
management practitioners and other stakeholders that defi nes the aspects of Project Risk Management that
are recognized as good practice on most projects most of the time and (b ) provide a standard that is globally
applicable and consistently applied. This practice standard has a descriptive purpose rather than one used for
training or educational purposes.
The Practice Standard for Project Risk Management covers risk management as it is applied to single
projects only. Like the P MBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, this practice standard does not cover risk in programs
or portfolios of projects.
C hapter 11 of the P MBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, is the basis for the P ractice Standard for Project Risk
Management . This practice standard is consistent with that chapter, emphasizing the concepts and principles
relating to Project Risk Management. It is aligned with other PMI practice standards.
Figure 1-1 compares the purposes of this practice standard to those of the P MBOK ® G uide – Fourth Edition
and textbooks, handbooks, and courses.
Figure 1-1. Hierarchy of PMI Project Risk Management Resources
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
This practice standard is organized in three main sections:
1. I ntroductory material including the framework, purpose, principles, context of, and introduction to
Project Risk Management processes as defi ned in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition.
2. Principles underlying the six Project Risk Management processes in the P MBOK ® G uide – Fourth
Edition. The six processes are as follows:
• Plan Risk Management,
• Identify Risks,
• Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
• Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis,
• Plan Risk Responses, and
• Monitor and Control Risks.
E ach of these six processes is described in a chapter that addresses the following four topics:
( a ) purpose and objectives of the process; (b ) critical success factors for the process; (c ) tools and
techniques for the process; and ( d ) documenting the results of the process.
3. A glossary of terms which are used in this practice standard.
T his practice standard emphasizes those principles that are fundamental to effective, comprehensive,
and successful Project Risk Management. These principles can and should be stated at a general level for
several reasons:
1. P rinciples are expected to be agreed upon now and to be valid in the future. While tools and
techniques are constantly evolving, the principles have more stability and persistence.
2. Different projects, organizations, and situations will require different approaches to Project Risk
Management. In particular, risk management is a discipline that contains a series of processes to
apply to both large and small projects. Risk management will be more effective if its practice is
tailored to the project and congruent with the organizational culture, processes and assets. There
are many different ways of conducting risk management that may comply with the principles of
Project Risk Management as presented in this practice standard.
3. The principles are applicable to projects carried out in a global context, refl ecting the many
business and organizational arrangements between participants, for example, joint ventures
between commercial and national companies, government and non-government organizations,
and the cross-cultural environment often found on these project teams.
T he principles described herein can be used as a check for an organization’s processes. Practitioners can
establish processes specifi c to their particular situation, project, or organization and then compare them with
these principles, thus validating them against good Project Risk Management practice.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
1.2 Project Risk Management Defi nition
T he defi nition of Project Risk Management, as defi ned in the P MBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, is the basis
for this practice standard: “Project Risk Management includes the processes concerned with conducting
risk management planning, identifi cation, analysis, responses, and monitoring and control on a project.” The
PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition also states: “The objectives of Project Risk Management are to increase the
probability and impact of positive events, and decrease the probability and impact of negative events in the
project.” In the PMBOK ® G uide – Fourth Edition, “project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs,
has a positive or negative effect on a project’s objectives.” Project objectives include scope, schedule, cost,
and quality.
Project Risk Management aims to identify and prioritize risks in advance of their occurrence, and provide
action-oriented information to project managers. This orientation requires consideration of events that may
or may not occur and are therefore described in terms of likelihood or probability of occurrence in addition to
other dimensions such as their impact on objectives.
1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management
P roject Risk Management is not an optional activity: it is essential to successful project management.
It should be applied to all projects and hence be included in project plans and operational documents. In
this way, it becomes an integral part of every aspect of managing the project, in every phase and in every
process group.
Many of the project management processes address planning the project, from concept to fi nal design
and from procurement through daily management of execution and close-out. These processes often
assume an unrealistic degree of certainty about the project and, therefore, they need to include treatment of
project risks.
Project Risk Management addresses the uncertainty in project estimates and assumptions. Therefore, it
builds upon and extends other project management processes. For instance, project scheduling provides dates
and critical paths based on activity durations and resource availability assumed to be known with certainty.
Quantitative risk analysis explores the uncertainty in the estimated durations and may provide alternative dates
and critical paths that are more realistic given the risks to the project.
Project Risk Management is not a substitute for the other project management processes. On the contrary,
Project Risk Management requires that these project management processes (e.g. scheduling, budgeting, and
change management) be performed at the level of the best practices available. Project Risk Management adds
the perspective of project risk to the outputs of those other processes and adds to their value by taking risk
into account. For instance, risk management provides the basis upon which to estimate the amount of cost and
schedule contingency reserves that are needed to cover risk response actions to a required level of confi dence
for meeting project objectives.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
There is a paradox about project risk that affects most projects. In the early stages of a project, the level of
risk exposure is at its maximum but information on the project risks is at a minimum. This situation does not
mean that a project should not go forward because little is known at that time. Rather, there may be different
ways of approaching the project that have different risk implications. The more this situation is recognized, the
more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be.
A risk management approach is applicable throughout a project’s life cycle. The earlier in the project life
cycle that the risks are recognized, the more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. Risk
management continues to add value as project planning progresses and more information becomes available
about all aspects and components of the project and its environment, such as stakeholders, scope, time, and
cost, as well as the corresponding assumptions and constraints. The balance between project fl exibility and
knowledge about project risk needs to be reviewed regularly and optimized as the plans develop.
I t is true that as the project plan becomes set with fundamental decisions, agreements, and contracts in
place, the options for making substantial changes to capture opportunities or mitigate threats are reduced.
During project execution, risk management processes monitor the changes the project undergoes for new
risks that may emerge so that appropriate responses to them can be developed, as well as check for existing
risks that are no longer plausible. Project Risk Management plays a role in providing realistic expectations for
the completion dates and cost of the project even if there are few options for changing the future.
F inally, throughout the project and during project closure, risk-related lessons are reviewed in order to
contribute to organizational learning and support continuous improvement of Project Risk Management
practice.
1.4 Good Risk Management Practice
P roject Risk Management is a valuable component of project management and it enhances the value of
the other project management processes. As with all of these processes, Project Risk Management should be
conducted in a manner consistent with existing organizational practices and policies. In addition, like the other
processes involved in project management, Project Risk Management should be conducted in a way that is
appropriate to the project. Project Risk Management should recognize the business challenges as well as the
multi-cultural environment associated with an increasingly global environment including many joint venture
projects and customers, suppliers, and workforces spread around the globe.
Changes in the project management plan that result from the Project Risk Management process may
require decisions at the appropriate level of management to reassign personnel, establish or modify budgets,
make commitments to others outside the project, interact with regulators, and comply with the rules of
accounting and law. Project Risk Management should be conducted in compliance with these internal and
external requirements.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
Project Risk Management should always be conducted on an ethical basis, in keeping with the Project
Management code of ethics or conduct. Honesty, responsibility, realism, professionalism and fair dealing
with others are among the characteristics of successful Project Risk Management. Effective Project Risk
Management benefi ts from robust communication and consultation with stakeholders. This enables agreement
among stakeholders that Project Risk Management in general, and risk identifi cation, analysis, and response,
in particular, should be carried out in a realistic and objective way and should not be subject to political or other
unreasonable infl uences.
Project Risk Management should be conducted on all projects. The degree, level of detail, sophistication of
tools, and amount of time and resources applied to Project Risk Management should be in proportion to the
characteristics of the project under management and the value that they can add to the outcome. Thus, a large
project that provides value to an important customer would theoretically require more resources, time, and
attention to Project Risk Management than would a smaller, short-term, internal project that can be conducted
in the background with a fl exible deadline.
E ach of the Project Risk Management processes should be scaled to be appropriate to the project under
management during the Plan Risk Management process and reviewed periodically to determine if the decisions
made in that process remain appropriate.
1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management
Figure 1-2. Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
S pecifi c criteria for success of each Project Risk Management process are listed in the chapters dealing
with those processes. The general criteria for success include:
• Recognize the Value of Risk Management — Project Risk Management should be recognized
as a valuable discipline that provides a positive potential return on investment for organizational
management, project stakeholders (both internal and external), project management, and team
members.
• Individual Commitment/Responsibility — Project participants and stakeholders should all accept
responsibility for undertaking risk-related activities as required. Risk management is everybody’s
responsibility.
• Open and Honest Communication — Everyone should be involved in the Project Risk Management
process. Any actions or attitudes that hinder communication about project risk reduce the effectiveness
of Project Risk Management in terms of proactive approaches and effective decision-making.
• Organizational Commitment — Organizational commitment can only be established if risk
management is aligned with the organization’s goals and values. Project Risk Management may
require a higher level of managerial support than other project management disciplines because
handling some of the risks will require approval of or responses from others at levels above the
project manager.
• Risk Effort Scaled to Project — Project Risk Management activities should be consistent with the value
of the project to the organization and with its level of project risk, its scale, and other organizational
constraints. In particular, the cost of Project Risk Management should be appropriate to its potential
value to the project and the organization.
• Integration with Project Management — Project Risk Management does not exist in a vacuum,
isolated from other project management processes. Successful Project Risk Management requires
the correct execution of the other project management processes.
These critical success factors for Project Risk Management are illustrated in Figure 1-2.
1.6 Conclusion
T he principles of Project Risk Management described in this practice standard should be appropriately
applied based on the specifi cs of a project and the organizational environment. Project Risk Management
provides benefi ts when it is implemented according to good practice principles and with organizational
commitment to taking the decisions and performing actions in an open and unbiased manner.
©2009 Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
