PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS . Introduction T his chapter introduces the key ideas required to understand and apply Project Risk Management to projects following the approach described in Chapter of the P MBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition. These principles and concepts are generally consistent with other approaches to Project Risk Management commonly used although the terminology may differ in some details. The execution of the Project Risk Management process is dealt with in subsequent chapters of this practice standard and so is not discussed here. . Defi nition of Project Risk The word “risk” is used in many ways in everyday language and in various specialist disciplines. Its use in the P MBOK ® G uide – Fourth Edition is consistent with other risk management standards and process descriptions. The defi nition of project risk given in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition is as follows: P roject risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative effect on a project’s objectives. T his defi nition includes two key dimensions of risk: uncertainty and effect on a project’s objectives. When assessing the importance of a project risk, these two dimensions must both be considered. The uncertainty dimension may be described using the term “probability” and the effect may be called “impact” (though other descriptors are possible, such as “likelihood” and “consequence”). T he defi nition of risk includes both distinct events which are uncertain but can be clearly described, and more general conditions which are less specifi c but also may give risk to uncertainty. T he defi nition of project risk also encompasses uncertain events which could have a negative effect on a project’s objectives, as well as those which could have a positive effect. These two types of risk are called, respectively, threats and opportunities. It is important to address both threats and opportunities within a unifi ed Project Risk Management process. This allows for the gain of synergies and effi ciencies such as addressing both in the same analyses and coordinating the responses to both if they overlap or can reinforce each other. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management R isks are uncertain future events or conditions which may or may not occur, but which would matter if they did occur. It is important to distinguish risks from risk-related features, such as cause and effect. Causes are events or circumstances which currently exist or are certain to exist in the future and which might give rise to risks. Effects are conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project objectives if the associated risk occurs. The cause-risk-effect chain can be used in a structured risk statement or risk description to ensure that each of these three elements is properly described (see Section .). When a risk event occurs, it ceases to become uncertain. Threats which occur may be called issues or problems; opportunities which occur may be called benefi ts. Both issues/problems and benefi ts entail project management actions that are outside the scope of the Project Risk Management process. . Individual Risks and Overall Project Risk It is useful to consider project risk at two levels: individual risks and overall project risk. I ndividual risks are specifi c events or conditions that might affect project objectives. An individual risk may positively or negatively affect one or more of the project objectives, elements, or tasks. Understanding individual risks can assist in determining how to apply effort and resources to enhance the chances of project success. Day-to-day Project Risk Management focuses on these individual risks in order to enhance the prospects of a successful project outcome. O verall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Overall project risk is more than the sum of individual risks on a project, since it applies to the whole project rather than to individual elements or tasks. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in project outcome. It is an important component of strategic decision-making, program and portfolio management, and project governance where investments are sanctioned or cancelled and priorities are set. At these higher levels, it is necessary to set realistic targets for the cost and duration of a project, establish the contingency reserve levels required to protect the project stakeholders, set appropriate project priorities, and judge whether the risk of overall success is increasing or decreasing as implementation advances. . Stakeholder Risk Attitudes T he risk attitudes of the project stakeholders determine the extent to which an individual risk or overall project risk matters. A wide range of factors infl uence risk attitude. These include the scale of the project within the range of stakeholders’ overall activities, the strength of public commitments made about the performance of the project, and the stakeholders’ sensitivity to issues such as environmental impacts, industrial relations, and other factors. Stakeholder risk attitudes usually result in a desire for increased certainty in project outcomes, and may express a preference for one project objective over another. How risk is regarded is usually also strongly infl uenced by an organization’s culture. Different organizations are more or less open, and this often impacts the way risk management can be applied. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Understanding stakeholders’ attitudes toward risk is an important component of risk management planning that precedes risk identifi cation and analysis, in order to optimize both project success and stakeholder satisfaction with the project’s results. These attitudes should be identifi ed and managed proactively and deliberately throughout the Project Risk Management process. They may differ from one project to another for the same stakeholders and will usually differ from one group of stakeholders to another. In fact a single stakeholder may adopt different risk attitudes at various stages in the same project. I t is also important to understand the particular implications of stakeholder risk attitudes on projects where the team is international, cross-industry, or multi-organizational. . Iterative Process It is the nature of projects that circumstances change as they are being planned and executed. The amount of information available about risks will usually increase as time goes on. Some risks will occur while others will not, new risks will arise or be discovered, and the characteristics of those already identifi ed may change. As a result, the Project Risk Management processes should be repeated and the corresponding plans progressively elaborated throughout the lifetime of the project. T o ensure that Project Risk Management remains effective, the identifi cation and analysis of risks should be revisited periodically, the progress on risk response actions should be monitored, and the action plans adjusted accordingly. If external circumstances change signifi cantly, it may also be necessary to revisit the risk management planning process. The development of an initial risk management plan and risk assessment is the start of the process, not the end. The frequency and depth of reviews and updates will depend on the nature of the project, the volatility of the environment in which the project is being implemented, and the timing of other project management reviews and updates. . Communication P roject Risk Management cannot take place in isolation. Success relies heavily on communication throughout the process. R isk identifi cation and analysis depend on comprehensive input from stakeholders in a project to ensure that nothing signifi cant is overlooked and that risks are realistically assessed. The credibility of the process and the commitment of those who should act to manage risks can be assured only if the way the process operates and the conclusions it produces are understood and seen as credible by all concerned. This demands effective and honest communication from the Project Risk Management process to the rest of the project team and other project stakeholders. Communication of the results of the Project Risk Management process should be targeted to meet the specifi c needs of each stakeholder and should be refl ected within the overall project communications strategy with each stakeholder’s responsibility and role in risk management identifi ed and agreed-upon. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management . Responsibility for Project Risk Management It may be considered simplistic to say “risk management is everyone’s responsibility” as previously stated. However it is important that management of project risk is not left to a few risk specialists. Project Risk Management should be included as an integral part of all other project processes. Since project risks can affect project objectives, anyone with an interest in achieving those objectives should play a role in Project Risk Management. The specifi c roles depend on the project team members’ and other stakeholders’ place within the project and their relation to project objectives. Roles and responsibilities for Project Risk Management should be clearly defi ned and communicated, and individuals should be held responsible and accountable for results. This includes allocating responsibility for specifi c activities within the risk process, as well as for resulting actions required to implement agreed-upon responses. Responsibility should also be allocated for ensuring that risk-related lessons are captured for future use. . Project Manager’s Role for Project Risk Management The project manager has particular responsibilities in relation to the Project Risk Management process. The project manager has overall responsibility for delivering a successful project which fully meets the defi ned objectives. The project manager is accountable for the day-to-day management of the project, including effective risk management. The role of the project manager may include: (cid:) Encouraging senior management support for Project Risk Management activities. (cid:) Determining the acceptable levels of risk for the project in consultation with stakeholders. (cid:) Developing and approving the risk management plan. (cid:) Promoting the Project Risk Management process for the project. (cid:) Facilitating open and honest communication about risk within the project team and with management and other stakeholders. (cid:) Participating in all aspects of the Project Risk Management process. (cid:) Approving risk responses and associated actions prior to implementation. (cid:) Applying project contingency funds to deal with identifi ed risks that occur during the project. (cid:) Overseeing risk management by subcontractors and suppliers. (cid:) R egularly reporting risk status to key stakeholders, with recommendations for appropriate strategic decisions and actions to maintain acceptable risk exposure. (cid:) Escalating identifi ed risks to senior management where appropriate: such risks include any which are outside the authority or control of the project manager, any which require input or action from outside the project, and any for which the release of management reserve funds might be appropriate. (cid:) Monitoring the effi ciency and effectiveness of the Project Risk Management process. (cid:) Auditing risk responses for their effectiveness and documenting lessons learned. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management