IDENTIFY RISKS . Purpose and Objectives of the Identify Risks Process A risk cannot be managed unless it is fi rst identifi ed. Consequently, after risk management planning has been completed, the fi rst process in the iterative Project Risk Management process aims to identify all the knowable risks to project objectives. I t is, however, impossible to identify all the risks at the outset of a project. Over time, the level of project risk exposure changes as a result of the decisions and actions taken previously in the project (internal change) and of externally imposed change. T he purpose of risk identifi cation is to identify risks to the maximum extent that is practicable. The fact that some risks are unknowable or emergent requires the Identify Risk process to be iterative, repeating the Identify Risks process to fi nd new risks which have become knowable since the previous iteration of the process. W hen a risk is fi rst identifi ed, potential responses may also be identifi ed at the same time. These should be recorded during the Identify Risks process and considered for immediate action if such action is appropriate. Where such responses are not implemented immediately, these should be considered during the Plan Risk Responses process. . Critical Success Factors for the Identify Risks Process The practices described in Sections .. through .. will maximize the value and effectiveness of the Identify Risks process and enhance the likelihood of identifying as many risks as practicable. .. Early Identifi cation R isk identifi cation should be performed as early as possible in the project lifecycle, recognizing the paradox that uncertainty is high in the initial stages of a project so there is often less information on which to base the risk identifi cation. Early risk identifi cation enables key project decisions to take maximum account of risks inherent in the project, and may result in changes to the project strategy. It also maximizes the time available for development and implementation of risk responses, which enhances effi ciency since responses taken early are often normally less costly than later ones. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management .. Iterative Identifi cation Since not all risks can be identifi ed at any given point in the project, it is essential that risk identifi cation is repeated throughout the project life cycle. This should be done periodically, at a frequency determined during the Plan Risk Management process. Risk identifi cation might also be repeated at key milestones in the project, or whenever there is signifi cant change to the project or its operating environment. .. Emergent Identifi cation In addition to invoking the Identify Risks process as defi ned in the project plan, the Project Risk Management process should permit risks to be identifi ed at any time, not limited to formal risk identifi cation events or regular reviews. .. Comprehensive Identifi cation A broad range of sources of risk should be considered to ensure that as many uncertainties as possible that might affect objectives have been identifi ed. .. Explicit Identifi cation of Opportunities The Identify Risks process should ensure opportunities are properly considered. .. Multiple Perspectives T he Identify Risks process should take input from a broad range of project stakeholders to ensure that all perspectives are represented and considered. Limiting risk identifi cation to the immediate project team is unlikely to expose all knowable risks. .. Risks Linked to Project Objectives E ach identifi ed project risk should relate to at least one project objective (time, cost, quality, scope, etc.), noting that the PMBOK ® G uide defi nes risk as an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative effect on a project’s objectives. Consideration of each project objective during the Identify Risks process will assist in identifying risks, noting that some risks may affect more than one objective. .. Complete Risk Statement I dentifi ed risks should be clearly and unambiguously described, so that they can be understood by those responsible for risk assessment and risk response planning. Single words or phrases such as “resources” or “logistics” are inadequate and do not properly communicate the nature of the risk. More detailed risk descriptions are required which explicitly state the uncertainty and its causes and effects. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management .. Ownership and Level of Detail R isks can be identifi ed at a number of levels of detail. A generalized or high-level description of risk can make it diffi cult to develop responses and assign ownership, while describing risks in a lot of detail can create a great deal of work. Each risk should be described at a level of detail at which it can be assigned to a single risk owner with clear responsibility and accountability for its management. Trigger conditions should also be identifi ed where this is possible and appropriate. .. Objectivity All human activities are susceptible to bias, especially when dealing with uncertainty. Both motivational biases, where someone is trying to bias the result in one direction or another, or cognitive biases, where biases occur as people are using their best judgment and applying heuristics, may occur. This should be explicitly recognized and addressed during the Identify Risks process. Sources of bias should be exposed wherever possible, and their effect on the risk process should be managed proactively. The aim is to minimize subjectivity, and allow open and honest identifi cation of as many risks as possible to the project. . Tools and Techniques for the Identify Risks Process A range of tools and techniques is available for risk identifi cation. These fall into the following three categories, as illustrated in Figure -: Figure -. Three Perspectives of Risk Identification © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management .. Historical Review Historical reviews are based on what occurred in the past, either on this project, or other similar projects in the same organization, or comparable projects in other organizations. Historical review approaches rely on careful selection of comparable situations which are genuinely similar to the current project, and fi ltering of data to ensure that only relevant previous risks are considered. In each case, the risks identifi ed in the selected historical situation should be considered, asking whether they or similar risks might arise in this project. .. Current Assessments C urrent assessments rely on detailed consideration of the current project, analyzing its characteristics against given frameworks and models in order to expose areas of uncertainty. Unlike historical review approaches, current assessment techniques do not rely on outside reference points, but are based purely on examination of the project. .. Creativity Techniques A wide range of creativity techniques can be used for risk identifi cation, which encourages project stakeholders to use their imagination to fi nd risks which might affect the project. The outcomes or effectiveness of these techniques depend on the ability of participants to think creatively. These techniques can be used either singly or in groups, and employ varying degrees of structure. These techniques depend on the ability of participants to think creatively, and their success is enhanced by use of a skilled facilitator. E ach category of risk identifi cation technique has strengths and weaknesses, and no single technique can be expected to reveal all knowable risks. Consequently, the Identify Risks process for a particular project should use a combination of techniques, perhaps selecting one from each category. For example, a project may choose to use a risk identifi cation checklist (historical review), together with assumptions analysis (current assessment) and brainstorming (creativity). Use of a risk breakdown structure which organizes the categories of potential risks on the project, a prompt list, or a set of generic list categories may assist in ensuring that as many sources of risk as practicable have been addressed, while recognizing that no such tools are complete nor can they replace original thinking. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Whichever risk identifi cation techniques are used, it is important that identifi ed risks are unambiguously described in order to ensure that the project risk process is focused on the actual risks and not distracted or diluted by non-risks. Use of structured risk descriptions can ensure clarity. Risk meta-language offers a useful way of distinguishing a risk from its cause(s) and effect(s), describing each risk using three-part statements in the form: “As a result of cause, risk may occur, which would lead to effect.” The relationship between cause, risk, and effect is shown in Figure -. Figure -. Cause, Risk, and Effect . Documenting the Results of the Identify Risks Process T he results from the Identify Risks process should be recorded in order to capture all relevant information currently available for each identifi ed risk. The main output from the Identify Risks process is the risk register. This includes a properly structured risk description and the nominated risk owner for each risk, and may also include information on the causes and effects of the risk, trigger conditions, and preliminary responses. © Project Management Institute. Practice Standard for Project Risk Management