PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
 The Plan Risk Responses process determines effective response actions that are appropriate to the priority 
of the individual risks and to the overall project risk. It takes into account the stakeholders’ risk attitudes and 
the conventions speciﬁ ed in the Risk Management Plan, in addition to any constraints and assumptions that 
were determined when the risks were identified and analyzed. 
 8.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Responses Process 
 The objective of the Plan Risk Responses process is to determine the set of actions which most enhance the 
chances of project success while complying with applicable organizational and project constraints. 
 Once risks have been identiﬁ ed, analyzed, and prioritized, plans should be developed for addressing every 
risk the project team considers to be sufﬁciently important, either because of the threat it poses to the project 
objectives or the opportunity it offers. The planning entails agreeing upon the actions to be taken and the 
potential changes to budget, schedule, resources, and scope which these actions might cause. 
 Contingent risk response actions need to be executed at the optimum time. For this reason, the response speciﬁcation for each such risk should include a description of any corresponding trigger conditions. 
 The responsibility for monitoring the project conditions and implementing the corresponding actions should 
be clearly assigned. Every risk should have been allocated to a risk owner as part of the Identify Risks process, 
and each of the corresponding risk responses should now be assigned to a speciﬁc risk action owner. The risk 
owner is responsible for ensuring that the risk response is effective and for planning additional risk responses 
if required, whereas the risk action owner is responsible for ensuring that the agreed-upon risk responses are 
carried out as planned, in a timely manner. The role of the risk owner and that of the risk action owner may be 
assigned to a single person. 
 Responses, when implemented, can have potential effects on the project objectives and, as such, can 
generate additional risks. These are known as secondary risks and have to be analyzed and planned for in the 
same way as those risks which were initially identiﬁed. 
 It is never feasible or even desirable to eliminate all threats from a project. Similarly, there is also a limit 
to the extent to which opportunities can be proactively managed. There may be residual risks that will remain 
after the responses have been implemented. These residual risks should be clearly identiﬁ ed, analyzed, 
documented, and communicated to all relevant stakeholders. 




Figure 8-1: Critical Success Factors for Risk Response Planning


This image presents the critical success factors for effective risk response planning. It organizes the factors into three main categories: People, Planning, and Analysis, with each category having its own set of factors.


1. People:
   - Communicate.
   - Define roles and responsibilities.


2. Planning:
   - Specify timing of responses.
   - Provide resources, budget, and schedule.


3. Analysis:
   - Address interaction of risks and responses.
   - Ensure appropriate, timely, effective, and agreed-upon responses.
   - Address threats and opportunities.
   - Develop strategies.


The factors are shown branching from the central element labeled Risk Response Planning, indicating that these are the key components necessary for successful risk response planning.


 All the approved, unconditional actions arising from risk response planning should be integrated into the 
project management plan in order to ensure that they are carried out as part of normal project implementation. The 
corresponding organizational and project management rules should also be invoked, including the following: 
 Project change management and conﬁguration control; 
• 
 Project planning, budgeting, and scheduling; 
• 
 Resource management; and 
• 
 Project communication planning. 
• 
 8.2 Critical Success Factors for the Plan Risk Responses Process 
 A range of factors are important for the success of the Plan Risk Responses process. These are described 
in Sections 8.2.1 through 8.2.8 and shown in Figure 8-1. 
 
 Figure 8-1. Critical Success Factors for Risk Response Planning 
  8.2.1 Communicate 
 Communication with the various stakeholders should be maintained in an open and appropriate manner. The 
resulting plans are disseminated and approval obtained in order to ensure full acceptance by all stakeholders. 
 In addition, if organizational causes of risks, such as culture, attitudes, or disagreements concerning 
objectives are present, they should be addressed openly. This may require involving high levels of the 
organization’s management and other stakeholders. 


 8.2.2 Clearly Deﬁ ne Risk-Related Roles and Responsibilities 
 The risk response success will be dependent upon the full support and involvement of the project team and 
other stakeholders. The key roles for Project Risk Management are those of risk owner and risk action owner. 
A single risk owner should be assigned to every identiﬁ ed risk, and each agreed-upon risk response should 
have a single risk action owner. The people with the corresponding responsibilities should be aware of what is 
expected of them, and the other project stakeholders should understand and accept the needs and authority 
of these roles. 
 Management may take ownership of risks with political, organizational causes. In addition, senior 
management should approve and track associated risk-related contingency reserves. 
 8.2.3 Specify Timing of Risk Responses 
 Agreed-upon responses should be integrated into the project management plan and will therefore be 
scheduled and assigned for execution. The responses that depend on uncertain conditions should also be 
monitored so as to be performed if the conditions warrant them. 
 8.2.4 Provide Resources, Budget, and Schedule for Responses 
 Each response should be planned in detail in accordance with the methodology of the project and integrated 
into the project management plan. This entails estimating the resources, costs, and duration; updating the 
budget and schedule; obtaining approval from management; and obtaining commitment from the risk owners 
and risk action owners. Management’s role at this stage is vital for supporting the project manager in developing 
risk responses and authorizing the corresponding resources. 
 8.2.5 Address the Interaction of Risks and Responses 
 Responses may be developed to address risks related either by cause and effect or by common root cause. 
Categorization of risks, for example by using tools such as the risk breakdown structure, afﬁnity diagram, or other categorizing tools, may help identify and address this situation. There is also a need during the Plan Risk 
Responses process to consider the risks aggregated during the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process 
(e.g., ten small, related risks combined may pose a big risk to the project), and then to develop generic 
responses where possible. Another interaction effect that may occur is when one risk, if it occurs, may affect 
the probability or impact of other risks. 
 Deciding on the response strategy may require a compromise, since some proposed responses may be 
mutually exclusive or counterproductive. For example mitigating a threat to time could cost money, thereby 
increasing pressure on the budget. Risk response planning also needs to take a holistic view of all proposed 
responses and make sure they are coherent. 


 The challenge therefore in planning responses to risks is the need to control the potential effects of the 
strategy developed for treating the original risk. If this is overlooked, the total level of threat in a project can 
actually increase, or the potential for opportunities can be compromised. 
 8.2.6 Ensure Appropriate, Timely, Effective, and Agreed-Upon Responses 
 In general, responses should be appropriate, timely, cost-effective, feasible, achievable, agreed-upon, 
assigned, and accepted. Any proposed risk response plan needs to be assessed against the following criteria: 
 Consistency with organizational values, project objectives, and stakeholder expectations; 
• 
 Technical feasibility; 
• 
 Ability of the project team or risk action owners outside the project to carry out the corresponding 
• 
actions; and 
 Balance between overall impact of the response on the project objectives and the improvement in 
• 
the risk profile of the project. 
 8.2.7 Address Both Threats and Opportunities 
 Risk response planning should combine responses that address the threats as well as those that provide 
for opportunities into a single, integrated plan. If either threats or opportunities are not fully addressed, the combined set of response strategies will be incomplete and may even be invalid. 
 8.2.8 Develop Strategies before Tactical Responses 
 Risk response planning should be carried out in an open-minded manner rather than adopting the ﬁrst 
response that seems to be feasible. The responses should be planned at a general, strategic level and the 
strategy validated and agreed upon, prior to developing the detailed tactical approach. 
 Once the responses have been planned at a strategic level, they should be expanded into actions at the tactical 
level and integrated into the project management plan (e.g., schedule, budget, and resource assignments). This 
activity may generate additional secondary risks, which will need to be addressed at this time. 
 8.3 Risk Response Strategies 
 The project manager should develop risk response strategies for individual risks, sets of risks, and project-
level risks. An overview of the steps in arriving at a complete set of responses is given in Figure 8-2. 
 The affected stakeholders should be involved in determining the strategies. Once the strategies have been 
selected, they need to be agreed upon by the entity that approves those strategies. There are four strategies 
which address individual risks for threats and opportunities as described in Sections 8.3.1 through 8.3.4 (see 
also Fig. 8-2). 


 8.3.1 Avoid a Threat or Exploit an Opportunity 
 This strategy involves taking the actions required to address a threat or an opportunity in order to ensure 
either that the threat cannot occur or can have no effect on the project, or that the opportunity will occur and 
the project will be able to take advantage of it. 
 8.3.2 Transfer a Threat or Share an Opportunity 
 This strategy entails transference to a third party that is better positioned to address a particular threat or 
opportunity. 
 8.3.3 Mitigate a Threat or Enhance an Opportunity 
 Mitigation and enhancement are the most widely applicable and widely used response strategies. Here, the 
approach is to identify actions that will decrease the probability and/or the impact of a threat, and increase the 
probability and/or the impact of an opportunity. 
 8.3.4 Accept a Threat or an Opportunity 
 This strategy applies when the other strategies are not considered applicable or feasible. Acceptance entails 
taking no action unless the risk actually occurs, in which case contingency or fallback plans may be developed 
ahead of time, to be implemented if the risk presents itself. 
 8.3.5 Applying Risk Response Strategies to Overall Project Risk 
 In addition to responding to individual risks, the four risk response strategies can be applied to address 
overall project risk as follows: 
 Cancel the project, as a last resort, if the overall level of risk remains unacceptable. 
• 
 Set up a business structure in which the customer and the supplier share the risk. 
• 
  Re-plan the project or change the scope and boundaries of the project, for example, by modifying the 
• 
project priority, resource allocations, delivery calendar, etc. 
 Pursue the project despite a risk exposure that exceeds the desired level. 
• 
 8.4 Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Responses Process 
 There are four categories of tools and techniques, as follows: 
 Creativity tools to identify potential responses, 
• 
 Decision-support tools for determining the optimal potential response. 
• 
 Strategy implementation techniques designed to turn a strategy into action, and 
• 
 Tools to transfer control to the Monitor and Control Risks process. 
• 


 These categories of tools can be used respectively to identify potential responses, select the most 
appropriate response, translate strategy into planning, and assign the corresponding actions. The steps 
involved in planning risk responses are shown in Figure 8.2. 
 8.4.1 Response Identiﬁ cation 
 Risk response planning builds on the available information about the potential risks and aims to determine 
the optimal set of responses. For this reason, it should involve subject matter experts and employ creativity 
techniques in order to explore all of the options. Project planning and execution techniques are then required 
to evaluate the potential effects of the various options on the project’s objectives. 
 8.4.2 Response Selection 
 Once the set of potential responses for the risks being addressed is established, decision-support techniques 
may need to be applied to select the best possible subset from these responses. The selection process should 
take into account the cost of the responses, the impact on the project objectives, uncertainty of outcomes and 
the possible secondary and residual risks. The Identify Risks, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, and Plan Risk 
Responses processes may then need to be applied to the resultant project management plan and the residual 
and secondary risks that it would entail. This iterative approach continues until all of the individual risks are 
deemed acceptable and the overall risk is within a predeﬁned threshold. 
 8.4.3 Action Planning 
 Project planning tools are used to turn the chosen strategies into concrete actions and to integrate these into 
existing plans. The corresponding actions may be unconditional (i.e., integrated into the project management 
plan) or contingent on a trigger condition and predeﬁned as a contingency response strategy. 
 8.4.4 Ownership and Responsibility Assignment 
 The project manager needs to use resource assignment processes to ensure the availability of an owner for 
each risk and for each response action, so that each associated risk is managed and each corresponding risk 
response is carried out in a timely and effective manner. 
 To enable risk monitoring to identify the imminence or actual occurrence of the corresponding event, every contingency response strategy should include a set of trigger conditions. The responsibility for monitoring 
these conditions should be clearly assigned in the Plan Risk Responses process and managed in the Monitor 
and Control Risks process. 




Figure 8-2: The Steps Involved in Planning Risk Responses


This image outlines the step-by-step flow of planning risk responses. The process is depicted vertically, with arrows showing the flow from one step to the next:


1. Plan Risk Responses:
   - The overall process starts with planning risk responses.


2. Identify Responses:
   - The first actionable step is to identify appropriate responses to the risks.


3. Select Responses:
   - After identifying potential responses, specific responses are selected for implementation.


4. All Risks Addressed?:
   - This is a decision point. If all risks are addressed, the process continues to the next step. If not, the process loops back to Identify Responses to address any remaining risks.


5. Plan & Resource Actions:
   - Once all risks are addressed, actions are planned, and resources are allocated to implement the risk responses.


6. Update Risk Register:
   - The risk register is updated to reflect the planned responses and actions.


7. Review Predicted Residual Exposure:
   - The predicted residual exposure is reviewed to ensure it is acceptable after implementing the risk responses.


8. Predicted Exposure Acceptable?:
   - This is another decision point. If the exposure is acceptable, the process moves to the final step. If not, the process loops back to the Plan & Resource Actions step for adjustments.


9. Update Project Management Plan:
   - If the predicted exposure is acceptable, the project management plan is updated to incorporate the finalized risk responses.


 The strategic deﬁnition of risk responses should include measurable criteria for success of the response. 
Risk action owners should monitor their assigned risks, take agreed-upon actions as required, and provide 
the risk owners with relevant information on status or changes to the risk characteristics. Risk owners should 
assess the effectiveness of any actions, decide whether additional actions are required, and keep the project 
manager informed of the situation. 
 
 Figure 8-2. The Steps Involved in Planning Risk Responses 


 
 8.5 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Responses Process 
 Risk response planning is based on the information placed in the risk register during execution of the 
Identify Risks and Perform Analysis processes. The corresponding risk response information is often referred 
to as the risk response plan, although it may in fact be an integral part of the risk register. 
 8.5.1 Add Risk Responses to the Risk Register 
 The response-related information for each risk is recorded in the risk register and updated regularly. Any 
interested stakeholder should be able to rapidly access all the information required to verify their responsibilities 
and manage the risk in accordance with the risk response plan. The set of residual risks and their priorities 
are clearly identiﬁed and recorded. 
 8.5.2 Add Corresponding Risk Responses to the Project Management Plan 
 While developing the detailed set of risk responses, the project-related implications are evaluated for 
inclusion in a modiﬁed project management plan. These include costs, resource assignments, scheduling 
details, and changes to project documentation. Until these changes are formally approved along with the 
additional risks that they may carry, risk response planning cannot be considered complete. 
 8.5.3 Review and Document Predicted Exposure 
 Once the risk responses have been deﬁ ned and integrated into the project management plan, the individual 
and overall residual risks related to this plan are evaluated in order to determine whether additional response 
planning is required, as shown in Figure 8-2. This evaluation should provide an estimate of both the expected 
post-response situation and the potential improvement of the risk exposure assuming that the proposed 
responses are effective. The evaluation should be documented. 


 MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
 The effectiveness of Project Risk Management depends upon the way the approved plans are carried out. 
These plans should be executed correctly, reviewed, and updated regularly. If this is carried out correctly, the 
invested effort will be rewarded and future projects will beneﬁt from this project’s experience. 
 9.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
 The primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identiﬁ ed risks, monitor residual risks, 
identify new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time, and evaluate their 
effectiveness throughout the project life cycle. 
 In addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions, the effectiveness of all of the Project 
Risk Management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current 
project as well as future ones. 
 For each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been deﬁ ned, the corresponding set of 
trigger conditions should have been speciﬁed. It is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these 
conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as defined, in a timely manner. 
 Once the Plan Risk Responses process is complete, all of the approved unconditional response actions 
should have been included and defined in the current project management plan. The ﬁrst action of risk 
monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary, 
such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This will then ensure 
that the agreed-upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework. 
 The risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their 
responsibilities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so 
that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of speciﬁ c risks, 
apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed-upon responses in a timely manner. 
 In addition to the response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness of the response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The risk action owner should keep the risk 
owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been 
effectively dealt with, or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented.