INTRODUCTION 
 Project Management Institute (PMI) practice standards are guides to the use of a tool, technique, or process 
identiﬁ ed in  A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition) or 
other PMI standards. Practice standards are targeted at audiences who participate in the management of 
projects. This includes project managers, project personnel, contract personnel, supervisors, and other project 
stakeholders. 
 A PMI practice standard describes processes, activities, inputs, and outputs for a specific Knowledge Area. 
It provides information on what the signiﬁcant process, tool, or technique is, what it does, why it is signiﬁcant, 
when it should be performed or executed, and, if necessary for further clariﬁ cation, who should perform the 
process. A practice standard does not prescribe how the process is to be implemented, leaving that subject for 
other forums such as handbooks, manuals, and courses. 
 This chapter includes the following sections: 
 1.1 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management 
 1.2 Project Risk Management Deﬁnition 
 1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management 
 1.4 Good Risk Management Practice 
 1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management 




Hierarchy of PMI Project Risk Management Resources


1. Top Section (Practice Standard):
   - Practice Standard: Positioned at the top of the hierarchy and focuses on providing specialized principles related to project risk management.


2. Middle Section (PMBOK Guide):
   - A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide – Fourth Edition): Contains the processes for managing risks, essential to project management.


3. Bottom Section (Handbooks, Textbooks, Courses):
   - Handbooks, Textbooks, and Courses: These resources offer theory, tools, and techniques that complement the practice standard and the PMBOK guide.


To the right of the pyramid, three arrows summarize the content provided by these resources:
- Principles of the Specialization (linked to the Practice Standard)
- Processes (linked to the PMBOK Guide)
- Theory Tools/Techniques (linked to Handbooks, Textbooks, and Courses)


The diagram helps visualize how the Practice Standard is supported by more detailed resources like the PMBOK Guide, and theory/tools found in handbooks, textbooks, and courses.


 1.1 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management 
 The purpose of the  Practice Standard for Project Risk Management  is to ( a  ) provide a standard for project 
management practitioners and other stakeholders that deﬁ nes the aspects of Project Risk Management that 
are recognized as good practice on most projects most of the time and ( b  ) provide a standard that is globally 
applicable and consistently applied. This practice standard has a descriptive purpose rather than one used for 
training or educational purposes. 
 The  Practice Standard for Project Risk Management  covers risk management as it is applied to single 
projects only. Like the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition, this practice standard does not cover risk in programs 
or portfolios of projects. 
 Chapter 11 of the  PMBOK  ®  Guide –  Fourth Edition, is the basis for the  Practice Standard for Project Risk 
Management . This practice standard is consistent with that chapter, emphasizing the concepts and principles 
relating to Project Risk Management. It is aligned with other PMI practice standards. 
 Figure 1-1 compares the purposes of this practice standard to those of the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition 
and textbooks, handbooks, and courses. 
 Figure 1-1. Hierarchy of PMI Project Risk Management Resources 


 This practice standard is organized in three main sections: 
 1.  Introductory material including the framework, purpose, principles, context of, and introduction to 
Project Risk Management processes as deﬁned in the  PMBOK  ®  Guide – Fourth Edition. 
 2.  Principles underlying the six Project Risk Management processes in the  PMBOK   ®  Guide  – Fourth 
Edition. The six processes are as follows: 
 Plan Risk Management, 
• 
 Identify Risks, 
• 
 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, 
• 
 Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, 
• 
 Plan Risk Responses, and 
• 
 Monitor and Control Risks. 
• 
 Each of these six processes is described in a chapter that addresses the following four topics: 
( a  ) purpose and objectives of the process; ( b  ) critical success factors for the process; ( c   ) tools and 
techniques for the process; and ( d   ) documenting the results of the process. 
 3. A glossary of terms which are used in this practice standard. 
 This practice standard emphasizes those principles that are fundamental to effective, comprehensive, 
and successful Project Risk Management. These principles can and should be stated at a general level for 
several reasons: 
 1.  Principles are expected to be agreed upon now and to be valid in the future. While tools and 
techniques are constantly evolving, the principles have more stability and persistence. 
 2.  Different projects, organizations, and situations will require different approaches to Project Risk 
Management. In particular, risk management is a discipline that contains a series of processes to 
apply to both large and small projects. Risk management will be more effective if its practice is 
tailored to the project and congruent with the organizational culture, processes and assets. There 
are many different ways of conducting risk management that may comply with the principles of 
Project Risk Management as presented in this practice standard. 
 3.  The principles are applicable to projects carried out in a global context, reﬂecting the many 
business and organizational arrangements between participants, for example, joint ventures 
between commercial and national companies, government and non-government organizations, 
and the cross-cultural environment often found on these project teams. 
 The principles described herein can be used as a check for an organization’s processes. Practitioners can 
establish processes speciﬁ c to their particular situation, project, or organization and then compare them with 
these principles, thus validating them against good Project Risk Management practice. 


 1.2 Project Risk Management Deﬁnition 
 The deﬁnition of Project Risk Management, as deﬁ ned in the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition, is the basis 
for this practice standard: “Project Risk Management includes the processes concerned with conducting 
risk management planning, identiﬁcation, analysis, responses, and monitoring and control on a project.” The 
 PMBOK  ®  Guide –  Fourth Edition also states: “The objectives of Project Risk Management are to increase the 
probability and impact of positive events, and decrease the probability and impact of negative events in the 
project.” In the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition, “project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, 
has a positive or negative effect on a project’s objectives.” Project objectives include scope, schedule, cost, 
and quality. 
 Project Risk Management aims to identify and prioritize risks in advance of their occurrence, and provide 
action-oriented information to project managers. This orientation requires consideration of events that may 
or may not occur and are therefore described in terms of likelihood or probability of occurrence in addition to 
other dimensions such as their impact on objectives. 
 1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management 
 Project Risk Management is not an optional activity: it is essential to successful project management. 
It should be applied to all projects and hence be included in project plans and operational documents. In 
this way, it becomes an integral part of every aspect of managing the project, in every phase and in every 
process group. 
 Many of the project management processes address planning the project, from concept to ﬁnal design 
and from procurement through daily management of execution and close-out. These processes often 
assume an unrealistic degree of certainty about the project and, therefore, they need to include treatment of 
project risks. 
 Project Risk Management addresses the uncertainty in project estimates and assumptions. Therefore, it 
builds upon and extends other project management processes. For instance, project scheduling provides dates 
and critical paths based on activity durations and resource availability assumed to be known with certainty. 
Quantitative risk analysis explores the uncertainty in the estimated durations and may provide alternative dates 
and critical paths that are more realistic given the risks to the project. 
 Project Risk Management is not a substitute for the other project management processes. On the contrary, 
Project Risk Management requires that these project management processes (e.g. scheduling, budgeting, and 
change management) be performed at the level of the best practices available. Project Risk Management adds 
the perspective of project risk to the outputs of those other processes and adds to their value by taking risk 
into account. For instance, risk management provides the basis upon which to estimate the amount of cost and 
schedule contingency reserves that are needed to cover risk response actions to a required level of conﬁdence 
for meeting project objectives. 


 There is a paradox about project risk that affects most projects. In the early stages of a project, the level of 
risk exposure is at its maximum but information on the project risks is at a minimum. This situation does not 
mean that a project should not go forward because little is known at that time. Rather, there may be different 
ways of approaching the project that have different risk implications. The more this situation is recognized, the 
more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. 
 A risk management approach is applicable throughout a project’s life cycle. The earlier in the project life 
cycle that the risks are recognized, the more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. Risk 
management continues to add value as project planning progresses and more information becomes available 
about all aspects and components of the project and its environment, such as stakeholders, scope, time, and 
cost, as well as the corresponding assumptions and constraints. The balance between project ﬂexibility and 
knowledge about project risk needs to be reviewed regularly and optimized as the plans develop. 
 It is true that as the project plan becomes set with fundamental decisions, agreements, and contracts in 
place, the options for making substantial changes to capture opportunities or mitigate threats are reduced. 
During project execution, risk management processes monitor the changes the project undergoes for new 
risks that may emerge so that appropriate responses to them can be developed, as well as check for existing 
risks that are no longer plausible. Project Risk Management plays a role in providing realistic expectations for 
the completion dates and cost of the project even if there are few options for changing the future. 
 Finally, throughout the project and during project closure, risk-related lessons are reviewed in order to 
contribute to organizational learning and support continuous improvement of Project Risk Management 
practice. 
 1.4 Good Risk Management Practice 
 Project Risk Management is a valuable component of project management and it enhances the value of 
the other project management processes. As with all of these processes, Project Risk Management should be 
conducted in a manner consistent with existing organizational practices and policies. In addition, like the other 
processes involved in project management, Project Risk Management should be conducted in a way that is 
appropriate to the project. Project Risk Management should recognize the business challenges as well as the 
multi-cultural environment associated with an increasingly global environment including many joint venture 
projects and customers, suppliers, and workforces spread around the globe. 
 Changes in the project management plan that result from the Project Risk Management process may 
require decisions at the appropriate level of management to reassign personnel, establish or modify budgets, 
make commitments to others outside the project, interact with regulators, and comply with the rules of 
accounting and law. Project Risk Management should be conducted in compliance with these internal and 
external requirements. 




This image, titled "Figure 1-2: Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management," depicts the factors contributing to successful risk management.


At the center is "Risk Management Success," surrounded by the following key success factors:
1. Recognize the Value of Risk Management
2. Individual Commitment/Responsibility
3. Open & Honest Communication
4. Organizational Commitment
5. Scale Risk Effort to Project
6. Integrate with Project Management


These factors all contribute to the success of project risk management.


 Project Risk Management should always be conducted on an ethical basis, in keeping with the Project 
Management code of ethics or conduct. Honesty, responsibility, realism, professionalism and fair dealing 
with others are among the characteristics of successful Project Risk Management. Effective Project Risk 
Management beneﬁts from robust communication and consultation with stakeholders. This enables agreement 
among stakeholders that Project Risk Management in general, and risk identiﬁ cation, analysis, and response, 
in particular, should be carried out in a realistic and objective way and should not be subject to political or other 
unreasonable inﬂuences. 
 Project Risk Management should be conducted on all projects. The degree, level of detail, sophistication of 
tools, and amount of time and resources applied to Project Risk Management should be in proportion to the 
characteristics of the project under management and the value that they can add to the outcome. Thus, a large 
project that provides value to an important customer would theoretically require more resources, time, and 
attention to Project Risk Management than would a smaller, short-term, internal project that can be conducted 
in the background with a ﬂexible deadline. 
 Each of the Project Risk Management processes should be scaled to be appropriate to the project under 
management during the Plan Risk Management process and reviewed periodically to determine if the decisions 
made in that process remain appropriate. 
 1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management 
 Figure 1-2. Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management 


 Speciﬁ c criteria for success of each Project Risk Management process are listed in the chapters dealing 
with those processes. The general criteria for success include: 
 
• Recognize the Value of Risk Management    — Project Risk Management should be recognized 
as a valuable discipline that provides a positive potential return on investment for organizational 
management, project stakeholders (both internal and external), project management, and team 
members. 
 
• Individual Commitment/Responsibility    — Project participants and stakeholders should all accept 
responsibility for undertaking risk-related activities as required. Risk management is everybody’s 
responsibility. 
 
• Open and Honest Communication    — Everyone should be involved in the Project Risk Management 
process.  Any actions or attitudes that hinder communication about project risk reduce the effectiveness 
of Project Risk Management in terms of proactive approaches and effective decision-making. 
 
• Organizational Commitment    — Organizational commitment can only be established if risk 
management is aligned with the organization’s goals and values. Project Risk Management may 
require a higher level of managerial support than other project management disciplines because 
handling some of the risks will require approval of or responses from others at levels above the 
project manager. 
 
• Risk Effort Scaled to Project    — Project Risk Management activities should be consistent with the value 
of the project to the organization and with its level of project risk, its scale, and other organizational 
constraints. In particular, the cost of Project Risk Management should be appropriate to its potential 
value to the project and the organization. 
 
• Integration with Project Management   — Project Risk Management does not exist in a vacuum, 
isolated from other project management processes. Successful Project Risk Management requires 
the correct execution of the other project management processes. 
 These critical success factors for Project Risk Management are illustrated in Figure 1-2. 
 1.6 Conclusion 
 The principles of Project Risk Management described in this practice standard should be appropriately 
applied based on the speciﬁcs of a project and the organizational environment. Project Risk Management 
provides beneﬁ ts when it is implemented according to good practice principles and with organizational 
commitment to taking the decisions and performing actions in an open and unbiased manner.