IDENTIFY RISKS 
 5.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Identify Risks Process 
 A risk cannot be managed unless it is first identified. Consequently, after risk management planning has 
been completed, the ﬁrst process in the iterative Project Risk Management process aims to identify all the 
knowable risks to project objectives. 
 It is, however, impossible to identify all the risks at the outset of a project. Over time, the level of project 
risk exposure changes as a result of the decisions and actions taken previously in the project (internal change) 
and of externally imposed change. 
 The purpose of risk identification is to identify risks to the maximum extent that is practicable. The fact that 
some risks are unknowable or emergent requires the Identify Risk process to be iterative, repeating the Identify 
Risks process to find new risks which have become knowable since the previous iteration of the process. 
 When a risk is first identified, potential responses may also be identified at the same time. These should be 
recorded during the Identify Risks process and considered for immediate action if such action is appropriate. 
Where such responses are not implemented immediately, these should be considered during the Plan Risk 
Responses process. 
 5.2 Critical Success Factors for the Identify Risks Process 
 The practices described in Sections 5.2.1 through 5.2.10 will maximize the value and effectiveness of the 
Identify Risks process and enhance the likelihood of identifying as many risks as practicable. 
 5.2.1 Early Identiﬁ cation 
 Risk identiﬁ cation should be performed as early as possible in the project lifecycle, recognizing the paradox 
that uncertainty is high in the initial stages of a project so there is often less information on which to base the 
risk identification. Early risk identiﬁ cation enables key project decisions to take maximum account of risks 
inherent in the project, and may result in changes to the project strategy. It also maximizes the time available 
for development and implementation of risk responses, which enhances efﬁciency since responses taken early 
are often normally less costly than later ones. 


 5.2.2 Iterative Identiﬁ cation 
 Since not all risks can be identiﬁ ed at any given point in the project, it is essential that risk identiﬁ cation is 
repeated throughout the project life cycle. This should be done periodically, at a frequency determined during 
the Plan Risk Management process. Risk identiﬁ cation might also be repeated at key milestones in the project, 
or whenever there is significant change to the project or its operating environment. 
 5.2.3 Emergent Identiﬁ cation 
 In addition to invoking the Identify Risks process as deﬁ ned in the project plan, the Project Risk Management 
process should permit risks to be identiﬁ ed at any time, not limited to formal risk identiﬁ cation events or 
regular reviews. 
 5.2.4 Comprehensive Identiﬁ cation 
 A broad range of sources of risk should be considered to ensure that as many uncertainties as possible that 
might affect objectives have been identified. 
 5.2.5 Explicit Identiﬁ cation of Opportunities 
 The Identify Risks process should ensure opportunities are properly considered. 
 5.2.6 Multiple Perspectives 
 The Identify Risks process should take input from a broad range of project stakeholders to ensure that 
all perspectives are represented and considered. Limiting risk identiﬁ cation to the immediate project team is 
unlikely to expose all knowable risks. 
 5.2.7 Risks Linked to Project Objectives 
 Each identiﬁ ed project risk should relate to at least one project objective (time, cost, quality, scope, etc.), 
noting that the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  deﬁ nes risk as an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive 
or a negative effect on a project’s objectives. Consideration of each project objective during the Identify Risks 
process will assist in identifying risks, noting that some risks may affect more than one objective. 
 5.2.8 Complete Risk Statement 
 Identiﬁ ed risks should be clearly and unambiguously described, so that they can be understood by those 
responsible for risk assessment and risk response planning. Single words or phrases such as “resources” 
or “logistics” are inadequate and do not properly communicate the nature of the risk. More detailed risk 
descriptions are required which explicitly state the uncertainty and its causes and effects. 




Figure 5-1: Three Perspectives of Risk Identification


This image shows a diagram representing the three perspectives of risk identification for a project. The perspectives are organized in a flow from "The Project" to three time-based views:


1. Historical Review (Past):
   - Arrows point from "The Project" to the "Past" indicating that a historical review of past risks is one way to identify risks for the project.


2. Current Assessment (Present):
   - A vertical arrow points from "The Project" to "Present" indicating that current assessment techniques are used to identify risks in the present context of the project.


3. Creativity Techniques (Future):
   - Arrows point from "The Project" to the "Future" indicating that creativity techniques can be used to foresee potential future risks.


These three perspectives — past, present, and future — offer a comprehensive approach to identifying risks for a project.


 5.2.9 Ownership and Level of Detail 
 Risks can be identified at a number of levels of detail. A generalized or high-level description of risk can 
make it difﬁ cult to develop responses and assign ownership, while describing risks in a lot of detail can create 
a great deal of work. Each risk should be described at a level of detail at which it can be assigned to a single 
risk owner with clear responsibility and accountability for its management. Trigger conditions should also be 
identified where this is possible and appropriate. 
 5.2.10 Objectivity 
 All human activities are susceptible to bias, especially when dealing with uncertainty. Both motivational 
biases, where someone is trying to bias the result in one direction or another, or cognitive biases, where 
biases occur as people are using their best judgment and applying heuristics, may occur. This should be 
explicitly recognized and addressed during the Identify Risks process. Sources of bias should be exposed 
wherever possible, and their effect on the risk process should be managed proactively. The aim is to minimize 
subjectivity, and allow open and honest identification of as many risks as possible to the project. 
 5.3 Tools and Techniques for the Identify Risks Process 
 A range of tools and techniques is available for risk identification. These fall into the following three 
categories, as illustrated in Figure 5-1: 
 Figure 5-1. Three Perspectives of Risk Identification 


 5.3.1 Historical Review 
 Historical reviews are based on what occurred in the past, either on this project, or other similar projects 
in the same organization, or comparable projects in other organizations. Historical review approaches rely on 
careful selection of comparable situations which are genuinely similar to the current project, and ﬁ ltering of 
data to ensure that only relevant previous risks are considered. In each case, the risks identiﬁ ed in the selected 
historical situation should be considered, asking whether they or similar risks might arise in this project. 
 5.3.2 Current Assessments 
 Current assessments rely on detailed consideration of the current project, analyzing its characteristics 
against given frameworks and models in order to expose areas of uncertainty. Unlike historical review 
approaches, current assessment techniques do not rely on outside reference points, but are based purely on 
examination of the project. 
 5.3.3 Creativity Techniques 
 A wide range of creativity techniques can be used for risk identiﬁ cation, which encourages project 
stakeholders to use their imagination to find risks which might affect the project. The outcomes or effectiveness of these techniques depend on the ability of participants to think creatively. These techniques can be used 
either singly or in groups, and employ varying degrees of structure. These techniques depend on the ability of 
participants to think creatively, and their success is enhanced by use of a skilled facilitator. 
 Each category of risk identiﬁ cation technique has strengths and weaknesses, and no single technique 
can be expected to reveal all knowable risks. Consequently, the Identify Risks process for a particular project 
should use a combination of techniques, perhaps selecting one from each category. For example, a project may 
choose to use a risk identiﬁ cation checklist (historical review), together with assumptions analysis (current 
assessment) and brainstorming (creativity). 
 Use of a risk breakdown structure which organizes the categories of potential risks on the project, a prompt 
list, or a set of generic list categories may assist in ensuring that as many sources of risk as practicable have 
been addressed, while recognizing that no such tools are complete nor can they replace original thinking. 




Figure 5-2: Cause, Risk, and Effect


This image presents a flow diagram showing the relationship between Cause, Risk, and Effect. The flow is structured vertically with arrows moving downward, illustrating the progression from cause to risk and then to effect:


1. Cause (Fact or Condition):
   - The top box labeled "Cause" represents a fact or condition that can potentially lead to a risk.


2. Risk (Uncertainty):
   - The middle oval labeled "Risk" represents uncertainty that arises due to the cause.


3. Effect (Possible Result):
   - The bottom box labeled "Effect" represents the possible result or outcome that could occur if the risk materializes.


This diagram simplifies the process of understanding how a cause leads to uncertainty (risk), which can result in a potential effect.


 Whichever risk identiﬁ cation techniques are used, it is important that identiﬁ ed risks are unambiguously 
described in order to ensure that the project risk process is focused on the actual risks and not distracted or 
diluted by non-risks. Use of structured risk descriptions can ensure clarity. Risk meta-language offers a useful 
way of distinguishing a risk from its cause(s) and effect(s), describing each risk using three-part statements in 
the form: “As a result of cause, risk may occur, which would lead to effect.” The relationship between cause, 
risk, and effect is shown in Figure 5-2. 
 
 Figure 5-2. Cause, Risk, and Effect 
 5.4 Documenting the Results of the Identify Risks Process 
 The results from the Identify Risks process should be recorded in order to capture all relevant information 
currently available for each identified risk. The main output from the Identify Risks process is the risk register. 
This includes a properly structured risk description and the nominated risk owner for each risk, and may also 
include information on the causes and effects of the risk, trigger conditions, and preliminary responses.