PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS 
 2.1 Introduction 
 This chapter introduces the key ideas required to understand and apply Project Risk Management to projects 
following the approach described in Chapter 11 of the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition. These principles and 
concepts are generally consistent with other approaches to Project Risk Management commonly used although 
The terminology may differ in some details. 
 The execution of the Project Risk Management process is dealt with in subsequent chapters of this practice 
standard and so is not discussed here. 
 2.2 Deﬁnition of Project Risk 
 The word “risk” is used in many ways in everyday language and in various specialist disciplines. Its use 
in the  PMBOK  ®  Guide  – Fourth Edition is consistent with other risk management standards and process 
descriptions. The deﬁnition of project risk given in the  PMBOK  ®  Guide – Fourth Edition is as follows: 
  Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative 
effect on a project’s objectives. 
 This deﬁnition includes two key dimensions of risk: uncertainty and effect on a project’s objectives. When 
assessing the importance of a project risk, these two dimensions must both be considered. The uncertainty 
dimension may be described using the term “probability” and the effect may be called “impact” (though other 
descriptors are possible, such as “likelihood” and “consequence”). 
 The deﬁnition of risk includes both distinct events which are uncertain but can be clearly described, and 
more general conditions which are less speciﬁc but also may give risk to uncertainty.   The deﬁnition of project 
risk also encompasses uncertain events which could have a negative effect on a project’s objectives, as well as those which could have a positive effect. These two types of risk are called, respectively, threats and 
opportunities. It is important to address both threats and opportunities within a uniﬁ ed Project Risk Management 
process. This allows for the gain of synergies and efﬁciencies such as addressing both in the same analyses 
and coordinating the responses to both if they overlap or can reinforce each other. 


 Risks are uncertain future events or conditions which may or may not occur, but which would matter if they 
did occur. It is important to distinguish risks from risk-related features, such as cause and effect. Causes are 
events or circumstances which currently exist or are certain to exist in the future and which might give rise 
to risks. Effects are conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project 
objectives if the associated risk occurs. The cause-risk-effect chain can be used in a structured risk statement 
or risk description to ensure that each of these three elements is properly described (see Section 5.3). 
 When a risk event occurs, it ceases to become uncertain. Threats which occur may be called issues or 
problems; opportunities which occur may be called beneﬁts. Both issues/problems and beneﬁ ts entail project 
management actions that are outside the scope of the Project Risk Management process. 
 2.3 Individual Risks and Overall Project Risk 
 It is useful to consider project risk at two levels: individual risks and overall project risk. 
 Individual risks are speciﬁc events or conditions that might affect project objectives. An individual risk 
may positively or negatively affect one or more of the project objectives, elements, or tasks. Understanding 
individual risks can assist in determining how to apply effort and resources to enhance the chances of project 
success. Day-to-day Project Risk Management focuses on these individual risks in order to enhance the 
prospects of a successful project outcome. 
 Overall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Overall project risk is 
more than the sum of individual risks on a project, since it applies to the whole project rather than to individual 
elements or tasks. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in project 
outcome. It is an important component of strategic decision-making, program and portfolio management, 
and project governance where investments are sanctioned or cancelled and priorities are set. At these higher 
levels, it is necessary to set realistic targets for the cost and duration of a project, establish the contingency 
reserve levels required to protect the project stakeholders, set appropriate project priorities, and judge whether 
The risk of overall success is increasing or decreasing as implementation advances. 
 2.4 Stakeholder Risk Attitudes 
 The risk attitudes of the project stakeholders determine the extent to which an individual risk or overall 
project risk matters. A wide range of factors inﬂuence risk attitude. These include the scale of the project 
within the range of stakeholders’ overall activities, the strength of public commitments made about the 
performance of the project, and the stakeholders’ sensitivity to issues such as environmental impacts, 
industrial relations, and other factors. Stakeholder risk attitudes usually result in a desire for increased 
certainty in project outcomes, and may express a preference for one project objective over another. How risk is regarded is usually also strongly inﬂuenced by an organization’s culture. Different organizations are more 
or less open, and this often impacts the way risk management can be applied. 


 Understanding stakeholders’ attitudes toward risk is an important component of risk management planning 
that precedes risk identiﬁ cation and analysis, in order to optimize both project success and stakeholder 
satisfaction with the project’s results. These attitudes should be identiﬁ ed and managed proactively and 
deliberately throughout the Project Risk Management process. They may differ from one project to another 
for the same stakeholders and will usually differ from one group of stakeholders to another. In fact a single stakeholder may adopt different risk attitudes at various stages in the same project. 
 It is also important to understand the particular implications of stakeholder risk attitudes on projects where the team is international, cross-industry, or multi-organizational. 
 2.5 Iterative Process 
 It is the nature of projects that circumstances change as they are being planned and executed. The amount of information available about risks will usually increase as time goes on. Some risks will occur while others will 
not, new risks will arise or be discovered, and the characteristics of those already identiﬁed may change. As a 
result, the Project Risk Management processes should be repeated and the corresponding plans progressively 
elaborated throughout the lifetime of the project. 
 To ensure that Project Risk Management remains effective, the identiﬁ cation and analysis of risks should 
be revisited periodically, the progress on risk response actions should be monitored, and the action plans 
adjusted accordingly. If external circumstances change signiﬁ cantly, it may also be necessary to revisit the risk 
management planning process. 
 The development of an initial risk management plan and risk assessment is the start of the process, not 
the end. The frequency and depth of reviews and updates will depend on the nature of the project, the volatility 
of the environment in which the project is being implemented, and the timing of other project management 
reviews and updates. 
 2.6 Communication 
 Project Risk Management cannot take place in isolation. Success relies heavily on communication 
throughout the process. 
 Risk identiﬁ cation and analysis depend on comprehensive input from stakeholders in a project to ensure 
that nothing signiﬁcant is overlooked and that risks are realistically assessed. The credibility of the process 
and the commitment of those who should act to manage risks can be assured only if the way the process 
operates and the conclusions it produces are understood and seen as credible by all concerned. This demands 
effective and honest communication from the Project Risk Management process to the rest of the project team 
and other project stakeholders. Communication of the results of the Project Risk Management process should 
be targeted to meet the speciﬁ c needs of each stakeholder and should be reﬂected within the overall project 
communications strategy with each stakeholder’s responsibility and role in risk management identiﬁ ed and 
agreed-upon. 


 2.7 Responsibility for Project Risk Management 
 It may be considered simplistic to say “risk management is everyone’s responsibility” as previously stated. 
However it is important that management of project risk is not left to a few risk specialists. Project Risk 
Management should be included as an integral part of all other project processes. Since project risks can 
affect project objectives, anyone with an interest in achieving those objectives should play a role in Project Risk 
Management. The speciﬁ c roles depend on the project team members’ and other stakeholders’ place within 
the project and their relation to project objectives. Roles and responsibilities for Project Risk Management 
should be clearly deﬁ ned and communicated, and individuals should be held responsible and accountable 
for results. This includes allocating responsibility for speciﬁ c activities within the risk process, as well as for 
resulting actions required to implement agreed-upon responses. Responsibility should also be allocated for 
ensuring that risk-related lessons are captured for future use. 
 2.8 Project Manager’s Role for Project Risk Management 
 The project manager has particular responsibilities in relation to the Project Risk Management process. 
The project manager has overall responsibility for delivering a successful project which fully meets the deﬁ ned 
objectives. The project manager is accountable for the day-to-day management of the project, including 
effective risk management. The role of the project manager may include: 
 Encouraging senior management support for Project Risk Management activities. 
• 
 Determining the acceptable levels of risk for the project in consultation with stakeholders. 
• 
 Developing and approving the risk management plan. 
• 
 Promoting the Project Risk Management process for the project. 
• 
 Facilitating open and honest communication about risk within the project team and with 
• 
management and other stakeholders. 
 Participating in all aspects of the Project Risk Management process. 
• 
 Approving risk responses and associated actions prior to implementation. 
• 
 Applying project contingency funds to deal with identiﬁed risks that occur during the project. 
• 
 Overseeing risk management by subcontractors and suppliers. 
• 
  Regularly reporting risk status to key stakeholders, with recommendations for appropriate strategic 
• 
decisions and actions to maintain acceptable risk exposure. 
  Escalating identiﬁ ed risks to senior management where appropriate: such risks include any which are 
• 
outside the authority or control of the project manager, any which require input or action from outside 
the project, and any for which the release of management reserve funds might be appropriate. 
 Monitoring the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the Project Risk Management process. 
• 
 Auditing risk responses for their effectiveness and documenting lessons learned. 
• 


 INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
 3.1 Project Risk Management and Project Management 
 All projects are uncertain. Uncertainty is inevitable since projects are unique and temporary undertakings 
based on assumptions and constraints, delivering project results to multiple stakeholders with different 
requirements. Project management can be seen as an attempt to control this uncertain environment, through 
the use of structured and disciplined techniques such as estimating, planning, cost control, task allocation, 
earned value analysis, monitoring and review meetings, etc. Each of these elements of project management 
has a role in deﬁning or controlling the uncertainty which is inherent in all projects. 
 Project Risk Management provides an approach by which uncertainty can be understood, assessed, and 
managed within projects. As such it forms an integral part of project management, and effective Project Risk 
Management is a critical success factor for project success. 
 For project management to be fully effective, however, it is important that Project Risk Management is not 
viewed as an optional process or performed as an additional overhead task. Since many elements of project management address inherent uncertainty, the interface between structured Project Risk Management and the other processes of project management needs to be clear. The outputs of Project Risk Management should be 
taken into account within many of the project management processes. They can, for example, impact: 
 Estimating resource requirements, cost, or duration; 
• 
 Assessing the impact of proposed scope changes; 
• 
 Planning or re-planning the forward strategy of the project; 
• 
 Allocating resources to tasks; and 
• 
 Reporting progress to stakeholders. 
• 
 None of these actions can be performed properly without a clear view of the risk involved, as determined 
during the Project Risk Management process. In other words, project management process effectiveness is 
increased by using the information and results from Project Risk Management. 
 In addition, effective Project Risk Management requires input from other project management processes. 
Outputs such as the work breakdown structure (WBS), estimates, the project schedule, assumptions list, etc. 
are all important prerequisites for effective Project Risk Management.